## MidJava 1-1 Intro to GUI [&GT;](MJ0102.md)

# Prereqs

This is an intermediate level Java class. It is primarily intended to expose you to a project that is not a simple thing that you can knock out in a day or two.  

As an intermediate Java class, I will assume that you have some knowledge about programming in Java. I.e. I expect you to know the following:

  0. You know how to create a class and you know that classes must live in files with the same name.
  2. You know that classes can have two types of variables, static and non-static, the static ones are allocated as single values that live for the life of the program, the non-static ones are fields contained in an object data structure and live only for the life of the object.
  2. You can create functions, both static and non-static, the static ones do NOT require an object of the class to operate on, the non-static ones are object function and DO require an object (called "this") to operate on
  2. You can create constructors, which have the same name as the class name.
  2. You know that there are primitive types like int, char, boolean, double
  2. You know that there are visibilities for variables and function - public, private, protected and default
  2. You can write if statements and while statements and for loops.
  2. You can spew out text with System.out.println()
  2. You know some of the standard classes like String, ArrayList, HashMap
  2. You have seen generics like ArrayList<String>
  2. You know about interfaces (function signatures only) and abstract classes (some but not all functions implemented)
  2. You know that classes can extend only ONE other class but can implement multiple interfaces.


There are probably other things that I expect you to know BUT mostly if ANY of the things that I just listed did not immediately cause you to say, "yeah, I know" then you probably want to take a beginning Java class first.

In addition to the main goal of giving expousre to a non-trivial project the other thing that I want to teach is just more experience with using all of those things that I mentioned above to build code. 

I will give a construction analogy. Beginning Java is about bricks and mortar, boards and nails, hammers and saws, frames and cement. It is about the building materials. And yes, in your first class, you build some things with those materials.

Intermediate Java on the other hand is about the buildings that you build. It is looking at foundations, walls, roofs, stairs, windows etc. Still all very generic construction stuff, but the emphasis is on the thing that you are trying to build rather than on the thing that you are building it out of.

In this course we are going to build a big project that emphasizes the GUI - the Graphical User Interface. We will build a gesture based music notation system. The music notation is clearly graphical and is quite structured so you will have to build classes that support that structure in order to draw it on the screen. Music Notation has the feature that it is not some toy system that has had all the difficulties removed - it is well documented, there are books written about it, and it is rich enough that we will NOT run out of things to do. The gestures, on the other hand, represent a method of user input and is intended to show you both some pattern recognition AI techniques and also to force you to think about how you want the user to interface with your system.

Unlike the smaller projects that you have probably built in beginning Java, that could typically be written with a class or two this project is intended to be complex enough that it will require 30 or 40 classes and thus requires that you do more organization than you probably have in the past. That, in my mind, is the purpose of this intermediate Java class, to help you get you used to using classes as an organizational tool.

This book was written as a set of course notes, documenting what was covered in a course that meets 2 days a week for 2 hours at a setting. I will try to put day markers into the text to let you know how far we got in each 2 hour session. I like to believe that you could work through this text on your own at roughly the same pace, possibly a little faster because you have copy and paste available to you here.

If you have not already done so, to get started you need to download and install your IDE.

[next: IDEA ](MJ0102.md)