## MidJava 1-6 Intro to GUI [&LT;](MJ0105.md) [&GT;](MJ0107.md)
# Text Output
Add a line after your oval

```java 
  g.drawString("Dude", 400,200);
```

Run the app and you should see the word "Dude" on the screen at the desired coordinates, though actually you can't see where those coordinates are. Let' clean that up with some local variables. Modify that to:

```java
  int x = 400, y = 200; String msg = "Dude";
  g.drawString(msg,x,y);
  g.drawOval(x,y,3,3); // 3 is just a small number to make a small dot
```

Run it and look where that dot shows up. Notice that it is NOT located at the upper-lefthand corner of the bounding box where the String shows up. Instead it is located at the BASELINE of the text. This is for the convenience of building things like word processors - English text sits on top of the lines on lined paper. Text is normally aligned at the base line.

## Text Alignment

We are going to draw a box around the text (or rather draw a box under the text). We actually don't care about boxing the text, BUT if we EVER expect to detect whether the user clicked on a word, we MUST know the bounding box for that text so that we can test the mouse coordinates to see if they were inside that bounding box.

In order to find out WHERE the text actually ended up on the screen we need to know something about the FONT that we are currently using to draw the text. Now where do you suppose that font is located? It must be some default font that was in the 'g' object. (and yes, just like you can set the color in the 'g' object there are commands that let you set the font).

Add this code before the drawString

```java
  FontMetrics fm = g.getFontMetrics(); // local variable fm is information about the current font.
  int a = fm.getAscent(), d = fm.getDescent();
  // the ascent is how far ABOVE the baseline the font extends, descent is how far BELOW for letters with 'descenders' like
  // gqy
  // so the entire HEIGHT of the font will be a+d
  int w = fm.stringWidth(msg);
  // note: since fonts CAN have variable character width, 'iii' taking less space than 'mmm', we must
  // tell fm, what string we are interested in measuring and fm will perform the calculation for us
  // and tell us how many pixels wide that string will be.
  // so now we know enough to draw the box.
  g.drawRect(x,y-a,w,a+d); // note: move y from baseline UP the page by subtracting the ascent
```

That should give you a bounding box for the text string.

[next: Random Colors ](MJ0107.md)