## MidJava 1-5 Intro to GUI [&LT;](MJ0104.md) [&GT;](MJ0106.md)
# Graphics Output
The first thing that we will explore with our paint program is some output functions, how to draw pictures onto the panel of our Paint application.

## Override paintComponent()

All painting in Swing is eventually done in a procedure called paintComponent. Since a Paint object is a Window and Windows are JPanels, they have a paintComponent method which we will now override in the Paint class - so add this to your paint class.

```java
  protected void paintComponent(Graphics g){
    g.setColor(Color.BLUE);
    g.fillRect(100,100,200,300);
  }
```

Run the app and you should see a nice blue rectangle.

The way it works is like this: all painting in a windowing system is done to a "graphics device context", which is given the name "Graphics" in java and is know as "hDC" in Microsoft Windows. 

The reason for "g", that device context, is that you are sharing resources in a windowing system. In particular the window that your application is using can be located anywhere on the screen. Your application typically has no idea where on the screen you are drawing. In fact, your application typically doesn't know WHICH screen you are drawing on (you could have multiple screens) or even WHETHER you are drawing on a screen (You could be drawing into off screen memory or drawing onto a printer or drawing on a pen plotter). 

When you make a call like g.fillRect(x,y,w,h). You are telling that g object that was handed to you by the operating system the "local coordinates" that you want to use for your drawing. That (x,y) coordinate - (100,100) in our case, was saying that you want to move one hundred pixels from the left hand side of the window and 100 pixels DOWN from the top of your window. It is the job of the Graphics object to figure out what the "global coordinates", the actual place on the screen, that your local coordinates represent.

Note: Unlike your math classes from school where x coordiantes increase to the right of your origin and your y coordinates go UP the page. In computers the origin is always in the UPPER-LEFT corner and the y coordinates go DOWN! The reason for this is simple. Computers were always displaying TEXT from the top down - standard writing order - and as a result increasing Y meant increasing LINE count in your document. When they started doing graphics on computers the direction for increasing Y had already been decided. Y values go DOWN the page!

The Color class has a few static colors defined, BLUE is one of them, and the setColor call just tells the g object what color we it to use for our drawing. This saves us from passing in the current color to every single graphics command. It means that paintComponent routines typically consist of a call to setColor, followed by a bunch of drawing commands, then another setColor, then more drawing, etc.

## fillRect(x,y,w,h)

The fillRect function "fills" a rectangle with the current color, as you have just seen. Now here are 3 other commands just like fill rect that you should try out.

## drawRect(x,y,w,h)

Just change the word 'fill' to 'draw' and run your app again. Notice that instead of filling the interior of the rectangle with blue it now draws just the border of the rectangle.

## drawOval(x,y,w,h)

Change the word Rect to Oval and run. No supprise you get an elipse that fits into the same space as the rectangle.

## fillOval(x,y,w,h)

No surprise this function fills the interior of the elipse.

## drawLine(x1,y1,x2,y2)

add some code after the fillOval call

```java
  g.setColor(Color.BLACK);
  g.drawLine(100,600,600,100);
```

It should draw a black line running diagonally up the page.

[next: Text Output](MJ0106.md)

