## MidJava 1-7 Intro to GUI [&LT;](MJ0106.md) [&GT;](MJ0108.md)
# Random Colors
We have only used a few colors so far, static members from the color class. We want to be able to create colors in the full range so we will need the Color constructor. Furthermore, I might as well remind you how to use a random number generator.

In my course in RL (Real Life), I shoved the random number generator directly into the Paint class, but I wasn't thinking. For you folks lucky enough to be reading these notes we will create a new class in the graphicsLib package named 'G'. We will be needing that later so we might as well build it now and start using it. So add to graphicsLib:
## G.java

```java
  package musicEd.graphicsLib;
  
  import java.awt.*;
  import java.util.Random;
  
  public class G{
    public static Random RND = new Random();
    public static int rnd(int max){return RND.nextInt(max);}
    public static Color rndColor(){return new Color(rnd(256),rnd(256),rnd(256)); } 
  }
```

The 'G' class is one that I often use for graphics application. It is full of little helper classes that are made of tiny one line helper functions that are very convenient. We will be adding to this class often throughout this course.

As you can see I created a static variable to hold my new Random number generator. I built a helper function that gives me a random number in an integer range, and I used that to build a helper function that constructs a new color. 

The arguments to the Color constructor are the Red, Green, and Blue light levels. Those levels range from 0 (no light at all - completely dark - i.e. BLACK) to 255, the max value. When all 3 are at the max value you get the bright mixture of red, green, and blue which is white light from the screen. so Color(255,255,255) is WHITE.

Now we can go back and modify the color the that filled oval in Paint to be a random color

```java
  Color c = G.rndColor();
  g.setColor(c);  
```

Run the app and you should see something other than the blue that we used to be using.

I used a random color in my paintComponent for an ulterior motive. Grab the lower corner of the window and resize it. Notice that the Color of that Oval rapidly changes. WHY?

The reason is that it is the Operating System that notices that you are RESIZING the window and it is the Operating System that is calling you paintComponent routine. It is the OS that decided that something important has changed (the size of your window) and that your app MAY need to change the way things were laid out on the screen so it calls YOUR paintComponent to let your app fix things up.

In contrast, create some other window on your screen (for example, open up your little calculator app) and drag that window on top of your Paint Window. You can cover up your oval, then uncover it. Notice that the colors do not change in that case. 

Historic footnote: they used to change. In the old days when memory was expensive and very small, the OS called your app to tell you that part of your window was freshly uncovered and you needed to repaint it. Nowdays when machines have LOTS of memory, the OS buffers your images offscreen FOR YOU and when you uncover some application, the OS can restore what was uncovered on the screen from that offscreen memory without bothering your app.

HOWEVER, the important point is this: Your application paints WHEN the paintComponent function is called, BUT YOU don't call your paintComponent routine. It is the job of the OS to decide when your application needs to be painted. 

There is a routine that we will get to in a moment, repaint(), where you can tell the OS that YOU have changed something and you would like the OS at its convenience to call your paintComponent procedure, but for the most part, you paint only when the OS tells you to paint.

I call this to your attention because one of the bugs that you will continually run into when doing this sort of windows/graphics programming. You put some code into your paint procedure to do something and IT DOESN'T DO IT! This is disturbing until you remember that you did NOT call your paint procedure. The code that you wrote isn't running until the OS decides that it is time to run your code.

I also want to point out that the OS MAY call your paint proc MANY times. (Just resize the window again and look at how many color changes you went through.) For this reason it is a little tacky to do what we just did, creating random colors IN paintComponent. We create a Color object once, draw with it once, then immediately throw it on the garbage heap and this happens on every single one of those many calls to paintComponent. 

Typically one would instead create a static array with several random colors and then select one of those colors randomly in paintComponent. What I did here was NOT very nice to the garbage collector and in a real application I probably would have behaved better. For a toy app like this it doesn't matter.

[next: Mouse Input](MJ0108.md)
