## MidJava 1-9 Intro to GUI [&LT;](MJ0108.md) [&GT;](MJ0201.md)
# Polylines
A polyline is the sort of thing that you get when you draw a path on the screen with your mouse. It is just one sequence of x,y coordinates after another. Creating polylines or paths is pretty much the purpose of a Paint program.

Add the following NESTED class to your Paint class. Basically go down the the end of the paint class, and just BEFORE the final closing brace insert the following:

```java
  public static class Path extends ArrayList<Point>{
    public void draw(Graphics g){
      for(int i = 1; i<size(); i++){
        Point p = get(i-1), n = get(i); // the previous and the next point
        g.drawLine(p.x,p.y,n.x,n.y);
      }
    }
  }
```

I use static nested classes a lot. They are useful for controlling name spaces. You are used to 'helper' functions, little helpful function, well these are little 'helper' classes. I will however defer explaining what they are and why we use them until later.

I do however especially emphisize the word "static". Until I say otherwise all NESTED classes should be STATIC. Before this course is over we will also be using non-static ones but until I say so ALWAYS make any nested class static.

The important thing about static nested classes is that they behave EXACTLY like a normal class that you define over in a file all by itself. The ONLY real difference between a nested class and a standalone class is that a nested class essentially has TWO names, a short name that can ONLY be used in the surrounding class, and a full name that MUST be used by any outside class that wants at the nested class. The name space advantage that I get is that the full name has a 'dot' in it.

Within the Paint class we can now use the short name Path, but if something other than Paint wants to used this class it must use the full name which is Paint.Path.

In general, one uses static nested classes, when the ONLY consumer of the class is the surrounding class. In other words, the Nested class is just a helper class for the surrounding class and is ONLY used in the surrounding class. However that is NOT a requirement. A public static nested class can be used by ANY other class and those cases you can think of it as a regular old class that just happens to have a 'dot' in its full name.

In this case our Path class is just an ArrayList of Point. Point is a java.awt class that holds coordinate pairs, so you can talk about p.x and p.y.

Because our Path is just an ArrayList, if we create no special constructor for this class we will get the default constructor for an Array list which just creates an empty list which is want we want. Being an ArrayList, we also immediately get to inherit all of those nice functions that come with ArrayLists like add() which will and a new item (in this case a new Point) to the list and size() to tell us how long the list is.

Now we have built one single function in our Path class, a draw routine which connects the dots. Notice that the 'for' loop starts at 1 not at zero. That is because there is one less line segment than the number of points on the list - so we start the loop at 1 and then we back up by 1 to get the previous point which was at 0. Each time through the loop we draw from the previous point to the current one.

Now that we have a helper class to hold a single polyline/path we modify Paint to hold a single path

```java
  public static Path daPath = new Path();
```

And we insert a line of code into the paintComponent to draw that path.

```java
  daPath.draw(g);
```

We modify our mousePressed routine so that it clears out the previous path and then adds the location of the current press event to start a new path

```java
  public void mousePressed(MouseEvent me){
    clicks++;
    daPath.clear();
    daPath.add(me.getPoint());
    repaint();
  } 
```

And finally we override mouseDragged, to make sure that every time the mouse moves, we add a new point to the growing daPath

```java
  public void mouseDragged(MouseEvent me){
    daPath.add(me.getPoint());
    repaint(); // I forgot to add this in class - so we added points but did not SEE them! a bug!
  }  
```

With those changes you should find that you can now draw lines on the screen.

There is still a bug/feature lurking in this application. Draw several lines on the screen. Do you see them all? WHY? There is only ONE SINGLE daPath variable. The old ones where cleared out and replaced by the most recent one. paintComponent only paints ONE daPath. So how did those other lines end up on the screen?

The answer is that you never cleared them off. Whatever trash was left on the screen is still there and your paintComponent just added some more stuff to that trash pile. This is another common mistake in graphics programming and easily fixed if you remember to do it. Just make sure that your FIRST step in your paintComponent is to fill a large rectangle with your favorite background color to first CLEAR OUT THE TRASH.

```java
  g.setColor(Color.WHITE); g.fillRect(0,0,3000,3000); // White Background
```

You can think of this bug as being similar to an un-initialized variable. If you just start accumulating values into a variable and you didn't first set it to zero you get whatever junk was previously in that variable. 

As I mentioned in the previous section there is a difference in the way that paintComponent works on Windows machines and Apple machines. If you want your code to work correctly on either machine, you MUST clear the screen before you start painting - because ONE of those two operating systems clears the screen for you and one does not.

## Homework assignment

Paint only allows us to draw one single path. We clearly want to be able to scribble all over the page with many paths. Fix it. 

Fix it by introducing a single new static nested class, Pic, that is an ArrayList&LT;Path&GT;. Modify your mouse code so that it properly creates a new Path element on mouseDown and add it to the ever growing list in daPic.

## End of Day 1

That was the end of the first day of class. 

## Homework Spoiler
### Paint.java
```java
  package marlin.sandbox;
  
  import marlin.graphicsLib.Window;
  import java.awt.*;
  import java.awt.event.MouseEvent;
  import java.util.ArrayList;
   
  public class Paint extends Window{
    public Paint(){super("Paint", 1000, 800);}
  
    public static Path daPath = new Path();
    public static Pic daPic = new Pic();
  
    @Override
    protected void paintComponent(Graphics g){
      g.setColor(Color.WHITE); g.fillRect(0,0,3000,3000); // clear background
      g.setColor(Color.BLACK);
      daPic.draw(g);  // remember to modify so you paint daPic instead of painting daPath
    }
  
    public void mousePressed(MouseEvent me){
      daPath = new Path();
      daPath.add(me.getPoint());  
      daPic.add(daPath);  // daPath is now just an alternate reference to the last path in daPic
      repaint();
    }
  
    @Override
    public void mouseDragged(MouseEvent me){
      daPath.add(me.getPoint());
      repaint();
    }
   
    public static class Path extends ArrayList<Point>{
      public void draw(Graphics g){
        for(int i = 1; i<this.size(); i++){
          Point p = get(i-1), n = get(i); // get two adjacent points
          g.drawLine(p.x,p.y,n.x,n.y);
        }
      }
    }
  
    public static class Pic extends ArrayList<Path>{
      public void draw(Graphics g){ for(Path p : this){p.draw(g);} }
    }
  }
  ```

   [next: Chapter 2 - Graphics Helpers](MJ0201.md)