## MidJava 1-8 Intro to GUI [&LT;](MJ0107.md) [&GT;](MJ0109.md)
# Mouse Input
The way that events are handled in Swing is with the use of listeners, there is a MouseListener and a MouseMotionListener, and a KeyboardListener. Basically some block of code that needs to REACT to a MouseEvent needs to register itself as a MouseListener and then when some mouse event happens all the registered MouseListeners are 'told' that a MouseEvent has happened.

My Window class created itself as those three listeners, and registered itself at all the proper places to get those calls, and then my Window class 'implemented' all those mouse and keyboard listening functions and does NOTHING with any of them. Those NULL function are stubs, that do nothing BUT they satisfy the CONTRACT that the listener interfaces required.

When you create an app like Paint that extends Window you can now in that Paint class override any of those listening functions to put in mouse or keyboard behavior that you need. 

So to show this do add the following to your Paint class:

```java
  public static int clicks = 0; // we will total the mouse clicks
  
  public void mousePressed(MouseEvent me){
    clicks++; // bump up the click counter.
  }
```

and inside the paintComponent routine modify the msg that we were printing out to this:

```java
  String msg = "Clicks = "+clicks;
```

run your application and you should see the message "Clicks = 0" on the scree. Click the mouse a few times. Does the message update?

NO IT DOES NOT! WHY?

(warning! this bug I am now highlighting here MIGHT show up on your machine and might not. Window machines and Apple machines behave differently. Contrary to marketing lies Java does NOT smooth over every difference between Operating Environments.)

Resize your window. Is the message correct now? It should be. Our problem was that the mouse listener updated the clicks count BUT the OS was not calling our paintComponent function to update the screen. THIS is the situation where you need repaint(). Add the repaint line to mousePressed and relaunch.

```java
  public void mousePressed(MouseEvent me){
    clicks++; 
    repaint();
  } 
```

With that fix, presumably now when you click your mouse the screen is now dynamically updating and showing the proper click count.

OOPS! not quite. The count string is now drawing numbers on top of the numbers that it drew from the last time that it painted. It is not clearing the screen before it paints the new result. Generally the first thing that you want to do in your paintComponent is to clear everthing off so that you are starting from a clean screen. Add this as the first line:

```java
  g.setColor(Color.WHITE); g.fillRect(0,0,9000,9000);
```

I mention this again in the next section which is the time at which I actually noticed that I had not yet done this. So if you are following this book exactly, put this line in, see that it works, then comment it out, so that we can see the mistake once again in the next section.

[next: Polylines](MJ0109.md)