## MidJava 1-4 Intro to GUI [&LT;](MJ0103.md) [&GT;](MJ0105.md)
# Paint
The first app that we are going to create using Window.java is Paint, so in the sandbox create a class Paint that look like this:

```java
  package musicEd.sandbox;
  
  public class Paint extends Window{
    public Paint(){super("Paint", 1000, 800);}
  }
```

As you can see. Paint does practically nothing. It extends Window.

As soon as you extend Window, IDEA complains that there is no default constructor for Window. So you MUST create a constructor for a Paint object and call (using super) the non-default constructor for Window. The three arguments that Window expects are the Title of the app, and the default width and Height of the one single Window.

Next modify Main.java so that it looks like this:

```java
  package musicEd;
  
  import musicEd.graphicsLib.Window;
  import musicEd.sandbox.Paint;
  
  public class Main {
  
    public static void main(String[] args) {
      Window.PANEL = new Paint();
      Window.launch();
    }
  }
```

As you can see, we have changed our main routine so that it creates a new Paint object (and Paint is our Window) and it installs it into a static variable, PANEL, in the Window class and then it calls a static method to launch the application.

You can now run Paint. It won't do anything but it should open a window with the proper name, "Paint" and of the proper size. All you can do with our Paint app as this point is to close it.

BTW - this is standard practice. Baby steps. Do not write ANY code in your app, without first testing that you can launch your app. First make sure that the plumbing and the foundation works before you build a house on top of it.

[next: Graphics Output](MJ0105.md)
