## MidJava 1-2 Intro to GUI [&LT;](MJ0101.md) [&GT;](MJ0103.md)

# IDEs - Integrated Development Environment
I used to teach my Java course using NetBeans as the development environment. I have used it for years and know it fairly well. As a result I have decided to abandon it entirely a year ago and use InteliJ's IDEA Community Edition instead.

The reason is simple - as a professional it is good to tip over the apple cart occasionally, learn something new, see what the competition looks like AND when teaching - to suffer a little pain so that you are more sympathetic to what your students will be going through. "WTF? Why doesn't that work. Let me Goolge that. Here's the Stack Overflow article that explains... no, not really... that's not what I am looking for.." 

I redid my intro to Java course this year (2021) using Visual Studio Code and reformatted all my notes here into .md files. All part of the same process of keeping up with, and being aware of, changes in the tool sets that we work with.

I considered rewriting these notes to the mid-level course to remove all reference to IDEA but have since changed my mind. There is some debugging that we do later on and I prefer the debug environment of IDEA to Visual Studio Code. I will walk you through the install of IDEA but of course you may use what ever development environment suits you.

## Day 1
Let's get started. InteliJ is the company and IDEA is the product that you are going to download and install. I will presume that you can follow their directions and get something working that lets you build a Hello project that allows you to write the HelloWorld application.

After you get that first project working, you might want to change some of the default settings of the app. I always do - these systems NEVER have the proper setting for their white space and tabs. 

I Finally found the place to set the indents to 2 as GOD intended. 

File->Settings in the section on Editor - skip the General setting, which is useless, and look for CodeStyle. Open the CodeStyle section and you shoud find setting for JavaFiles there is a section on indents and tabs. There is also a setting there so that you can eliminate all those useless spaces between the key word "if" and the parentheses and the space between the close parentheses and the open brace and all those other places where the defaults put TOO MUCH WHITE SPACE.

Quite frankly, white space is for kids. I want to see as much code as I can possibly see on a single screen. I don't justify my style, and I don't even condone it. 

If you work for pay (anywhere), the guy that pays you will tell you which style you MUST use and that is what you will do. Technically, I am not paying you so you don't need to follow my style. You will certainly be able to see the style that I prefer in all the code examples that follow. I don't follow accepted Java style, instead I tend to speak java with a JavaScript accent.

Since my goal in this course is to produce one single large project I did that next. I created a project Marlin that lives in a package marlin.

I create several other packages as sub-directories to marlin namely - graphicsLib, sandbox, reaction, music

The only two that I need right now are graphicsLib and sandbox. The other two are for later. My thinking is this: graphicsLib is going to contain classes that I use for nearly every 2D graphics application that I ever build, so these are very generic library routines. The reaction package is for holding the classes that are used in my reaction/gesture architecture. Since not every application I build uses gesture recognition this reaction framework does not belong in graphicsLib. The music folder will be for the music specific classes. Lastly, sandbox, is the playpen. This is where I will create studies, practice drawings for code that I might want to use anywhere else in the system.

In this first introductory section (I am guessing the first 3 or 4 days), where I need to teach you the basics of Swing, I will build several toy applications in the sandbox to show you how things work. 

Near as I can tell, in IDEA you see the project name in the leftmost navigation panel. You can open it up to see the 'src' directory where all your source code is kept. If you open the src, you will see the 'marlin' package, and if you right-click on that package you will be given the option to create a new package under that one. So that is how you create the package structure for our project. At least for now, this is the package structure that I expect you to build.

```text
  marlin
    graphicsLib
    music
    reaction
    sandbox
  Main        // the Main class holds the main() entry point
```

Presumably when you created the Project Marlin IDEA created a class 'Main.java' for you. I edited mine to print "Dude" just to check that I could run it.

## Main.java

```java    
  package marlin;
  
  public class Main {  
    public static void main(String[] args) {
      System.out.println("Dude");
    }
  }
```

[next: Window.java](MJ0103.md)