## MidJava 2-7 Interactivity [&LT;](MJ0206.md) [&GT;](MJ0208.md)
# Animation
I will NOT be doing much of anything with animation in this course. However there are always people that primarily want to write video games and it seems wrong to be RIGHT at the place where I can show them how to do it and then NOT SHOW THEM! So this section is essentially a sidebar - I will show you the basic extra stuff for doing some animation and then you can either entirly forget it OR you can finally start your life's work as a computer animator.

Since animation is NOTHING other than showing one picture after another so rapidly that the eye blends them toghther and thinks that it is seeing continuous motion all you need to do is draw a picture, show it to the screen, then draw another slightly different picture and show it and then draw another ...

This infinite loop, is the animation loop. You need code that will calculate what the next frame will look like, i.e. claculate all the slightly new positions that things will be located at as they move from frame to frame AND you will need a Timer that will call your function to do those updates and to repaint your screen.

I am going to come at this animation in a couple of steps. First I am going to add a random velocity vector to each square. 

Basically to move a point at a constant velocity from one frame to the next you create a "velocity vector", dv, which is the distance in x and y that the point moves from one frame to the next. So if your velocity vector is (2,3) and You started a point at 100,100 then at the next frame it moves to 102,103 and at the next frame it moves to 104,106 then 106,109 and so on. This means that we will need to ADD velocity vectors to location vectors - so be sure that you have already included this function to the G.V class so that we can do vector addition:

```java
  public void add(V v){x += v.x; y += v.y;} 
```

Rather than have a split between the code that UPDATES the position of all elements from the code that DRAWS all the elements. I will just do the update as a SIDE EFFECT of drawing a Square. Thus paintComponent which DRAWS the full list of square, both DRAWS them AND MOVES them.

We will skip the timer for just a moment because we already know a simple way that we, as a user, can force a call to paintComponent - we just grab the lower corner of the window and shake it to resize the window. (This is just the poor man's animation timer! And it is also the reason that I use what is technically a bad structure - making motion a side effect of drawing - it means that by forcing drawing, which is easy, I can force frames. Bad structure BUT it make debugging your animation easy.)

So modify the Square class to add an additional field right after its color.

```java
  public G.V dv = new G.V(G.rnd(20)-10, G.rnd(20)-10); // random velocity between -10 and 10 in both x and y
```

And modify the draw routine so that it both draws the square and moves the location. I put this line into the Squares class so that a square could draw itself

### add to Square

```java
  public void draw(Graphics g){fill(g,c); loc.add(dv);}
```
and then updated the draw routine in the List class to call Square draw:

### add to List

```java
  public void draw(Graphics g){for(Square s : this){s.draw(g);}}
```

Check it out! Notice that just as you would expect, each time you add a new square all the previous ones move, because you are forcing a repaint. Also notice that since we never limited the locations of the squares they will all eventually fly off screen never to be seen again (well never say, "never". Actually, due to the limits of your integer size eventually the coordinates will wrap from positive 2 billion to negative 2 billion and will POSSIBLY eventually get back into the range where they would show up briefly on your screen.)

So our next step is to show you how to make things bounce. It is not difficult, it just means occasionally flipping the sign of a component of your velocity vector.

If you notice that the loc.x for your square is now less than the minimum coordiante for your screen (which is zero) AND if your dv.x was negative, it was that negative value of your x velocity that drove you into the left wall and when you bounced, your x velocity vectory should now be positive making you increase continually increase instead of decreasing. Likewise for your Right margin and likewise for your y values.

```java
  public void moveAndBounce(){
    loc.add(dv);
    if(loc.x < 0 && dv.x <0){dv.x = - dv.x;}
    if(loc.x > 1000 && dv.x >0){dv.x = - dv.x;}
    if(loc.y < 0 && dv.y <0){dv.y = - dv.y;}
    if(loc.y > 800 && dv.y >0){dv.y = - dv.y;}
  }
```

And of course, you now need to modify the draw routine so that it calls that moveAndBounce() routine.

```java
  public void draw(Graphics g){fill(g,c); moveAndBounce();} 
```

Check it out! Notice: If you are quick, you can still resize squares that you draw - the trouble being that your drag code, that was supposed to be rubberbanding your rectangle, is calling paintComponent over and over and thus continually moving the rectangle. Also notice, in our bounce code we are testing for when the UPPER-LEFT corner hits the wall NOT when the appropriate side of the rectangle hits the wall. It is of course an easy calculation to add the size vlaue to the loc value when necessary to fix this calculation and we will do that, BUT we will fix it in the VS class rather than in this Bounce code. The reason is simple: we will be working with these VS rectangles alot and we will often want to know where several other coordinates are as well. I have found it convenient to know 6 values, the lo, mid, and hi values of both x and y. So here are the helper functions to add to G.

### add to G.VS
```java
  public int xL(){return loc.x;} // Lo
  public int xH(){return loc.x + size.x;}  // Hi
  public int xM(){return (loc.x + loc.x + size.x)/2;}  // Mid
  public int yL(){return loc.y;}
  public int yH(){return loc.y + size.y;}
  public int yM(){return (loc.y + loc.y + size.y)/2;}
```

And with those installed we can fix moveAndBounce:

```java
  public void moveAndBounce(){
    loc.add(dv);
    if(xL() < 0 && dv.x <0){dv.x = - dv.x;}
    if(xH() > 1000 && dv.x >0){dv.x = - dv.x;}
    if(yL() < 0 && dv.y <0){dv.y = - dv.y;}
    if(yH() > 800 && dv.y >0){dv.y = - dv.y;}
  }
```
Check it out! If you quickly drag out a BIG box, you should be able to see that it is now bouncing its right hand side off the right hand wall and it bottom side off the bottom of the window.

And now finally, the magic dust, the Timer code that you have been waiting for so that you don't need to shake the window.

Timers are easy. Their constructor requires two arguments. The first is a time interval in thousandths of seconds (aka milliseconds) for how frequently you want to be called. So 1000 means call me each second, 2000 is every 2 seconds, 33 is about 30 frames  a second which will be fine for our tiny little animation example. The second argument is an ActionListener.

WHAT? What is an ActionListener? An ActionListener is anything that implements the ActionListener interface which consists of a single function: void actionPerformed(ActionEvent ae). So you need to tell the Timer at the time you construct it WHICH object is going to sit around and wait around for the actionPerformed call.

Well in our case, since what we want to do is repaint the screen, it should be our Window object which is the single Squares object that we created in our main routine. This means that we need to make our Squares class into an Action Listener

```java
  public class Squares extends Window implements ActionListener{
```

Then we create the actionPerformed function

```java
  public void actionPerformed(ActionEvent ae){repaint();
```

And we will want a place that can hold the timer. We will just put the timere into a static variable in the Squares class since we will only need one Timer and we will modify the constructor of the Squares class to create and initialize that timer. Oh, Important point, we are talking Swing Timers here not java.util Timer. Make sure that you import the correct class.

```java
  public static Timer timer;
  public Squares(){
    super("Squares", 1000, 800);
    timer = new Timer(30,this);
    timer.setInitialDelay(5000); // I give myself 5 seconds before the timer starts
    timer.start(); // start the timer
  }
```

Now you should have squares flying around on the screen. Pretty cool!

Actually, we might as well finish. We have nearly enough for a game right here.

We already have code that lets us drag a square around. On mouse pressed if we clicked on a square we put in into the daSquare variable. Let us just set the velocity for that square to zero. Now that square is not moving. So if you just click on a square, you can stop it from moving around. We will also want a static variable to track where we got that mouseDown that stopped the square

```java
  public static G.V pressedLoc = new G.V(0,0); // we will set this when the mouse is pressed
```

Now you can modify the dragging case of mouse pressed

```java
  } else {
    dragging = true;
    daSquare.dv.set(0,0);  // <-- we add this line to stop the velocity for the clicked square
    pressedLoc.set(x,y);   // also create a static G.V pressedLoc to Store the place where the mouse went down
    mouseDelta.set(daSquare.loc.x - x, daSquare.loc.y - y); // note if I add dm to mouse I get ul
  }
```

And finally we will add a mouseReleased function that looks to see if we had stopped a box and if so, it will start it moving again by setting the velocity to be the difference between where you clicked down to stop the box and where you moved to before you released it. So if you click down on a box and flick to the right, you will be setting the box from whatever heading it used to be on to now moving to the right.

```java
  public void mouseReleased(MouseEvent me){
    if(dragging){
      daSquare.dv.set(me.getX() - pressedLoc.x, me.getY() - pressedLoc.y);
    }
  }
```

Your Mission: Create some boxes and then stop them. Be careful. If you flick the mouse too hard when stopping a box you set it flying off in a different direction. If you miss the box that you were trying to stop you will have just created a new box moving is some other direction. Good Luck!

Games are like so cool. Who wouldn't want to be a computer animator and spent all their time writing and playing games? Why am I even teaching this course? I could, like, start a game company - Oh wait, I did that already. Sold it.

Sorry, I got carried away, that is enough animation for this course.

[next: UC and I ](MJ0208.md)
