## MidJava 2-8 Interactivity [&LT;](MJ0207.md) [&GT;](MJ0209.md)
# UC and I
This next section is about a couple of name-convention tricks that I use to deal the complexity of mid-sized projects with dozens or hundreds of classes. I have found them convenient and I will use them in this project.

They serve two different purposes but they are based on the same basic organization principle, namely collecting several different things into a single file.

## I.java

I keep all my interfaces as static nested interfaces inside a single interface named I. The interface I does nothing except change the names of all my interfaces. So if I need three interfaces, React, Hit, and Draw, I will create them like this:

```java
  public interface I{
    public interface Draw{ public void draw(Graphics g);}
    public interface Hit{ public boolean hit(int x, int y);}
    public interface React{ 
      public int bid(Gesture g);
      public void doit(Gesture g);
    }
  } 
```

I collect my interfaces together for 2 reasons. First, there is one single place where I go to look at ALL my interfaces. Secondly and more importantly, it gives my interfaces all a distinctive name. The interfaces that I defined above, because they are nested, actually have the following full names I.React, I.Hit, and I.Draw - This makes it clear that they are all interfaces and it allows me to do things like this:

```java
  public class Foo implements I.Foo{...}
```

Where I build a single class Foo that does what I want by implementing the interface I.Foo - I find this to be a better naming convention than the sort of thing that shows up in the Java libraries where you have an interface like MouseListener and a class that implements that interface like MouseAdapter.

I don't claim that this convention is useful for monster sized projects that may have hundreds of interfaces but I have found it useful in the past and we will use this convention in this project - so you can go build I.java now. I would put it in the marlin package so that it is obvious that this applies to our entire project.

## Universal Constants

In a very similar manner to the trick of collecting all my interfaces into a single file, I do the same thing with most of my static constants which are generally used to hold Magic Numbers.

In most of the projects that you have built previously you have probably been taught to eliminate magic numbers by declaring them as final static values in the class that needs them. So if you have some buffer class and you have some standard size that you allocate your arrays you might have:

```java
  public class Buffer{
    public static final int defaultBufferSize = 1000;
    public int[] buffer = new int[defaultBufferSize];
    ...
  ```

This is all well and good, but there is an organizational problem with this design. The problem is that some day someone from marketing will come tell you that you need to build a User Interface laike a 'control panel' where the user can get in and change those default colors. They want the background color for the windows to be Green instead of White, and they want their buffers to be a little smaller like 500, and "Oh, we should let the user get in an customize everything - and they will need meaningfull names that they can understand from THEIR viewpoint as a user of the product not SOME technical GEEK name that you understand as an engineer"

That is when you realize that you have hundreds of little static variable names for magic numbers scattered across hundreds of classes and it will be a royal pain to locate them all and build some system that allows users to change them all. 

SO our trick here is to anticipate that we will get asked to do something like this someday, and to collect all our magic numbers into one single place.

I generally name that that class that will hold all my magic number, UC, which stands for UniversalConstants. And because it is a stand alone class I get to slip in an extra name for free. Here is what I mean:

In the class UC I typically define things with rather long names - the user friendly, global project, name. This is useful for maintainence and it deals with the fact that when I collect all the names acrosss the entire project into one single UC file I have a big name space where I must think of global meanings. However, in my individual class like buffer, I can use a much smaller more suscinct engineering name if I want to.

Basically I may have this in UC

```java
  public static final defaultBufferSize = 1000;
  public static Color mainWindowBackgroundColor = Color.White;
  public static Color dialogBackgroundColor = new Color(0,0,10); // light blue
```

Then over in my classes I can do things like this:
```java
  // in my Buffer class
  public static final int MAX = UC.defaultBufferSize; // <-- inside this class I can use the name MAX
  public int[] buffer = new int[MAX]; 
  static{for(int i = 0; i<MAX; i++){buffer[i] =20;}}
  // in my MainWindo class
  public static final Color bkC = UC.mainWindowBackgroundColor;
  // in my dialog class
  public static final Color bkC = UC.dialogBackgroundColor;
  // and of course, if you DON'T want a different short name in your class you can always use UC directly
  g.setColor(UC.dialogBackgroundColor); //<-- the UC class just gives you the OPTION to rename.
```

This design allow me to 1) collect my magic number into one place, 2) modify any of them in that one place. 3) think of my names GLOBALLY in a way that makes sense for the entire project when I define them in UC and yet 4) have names that make sense locally within the scope of a class. 

There is of coure NO NEED to do this, I have just found it a usful notion for the projects that I tend to build. This is the reaon that I have NOT cleaned up my magic numbers so far. I made my window 1000 by 800 because I had NOT built my UC class yet. Now that you know this trick it is time to clean that up. Put UC all the way up in the marlin package and start defining your constants there.

```java
  public class UC{
    // -- ints --
    public static final int mainWindowWidth = 1000;
    public static final int mainWindowHeight = 800;
  }  
```
[next: ](MJ0209.md)
