## MidJava 2-10 Interactivity [&LT;](MJ0209.md) [&GT;](MJ0301.md)
# Splines (under construction!)
This is a sidebar, meaning that we are doing something that you might find interesting at this point or you might not in which case you can skip it because it is not essential for what follows. At the back of this book, Chapter 8 is More Graphics and the first section is Splines, which is essentially a technique for drawing a smooth curve. I put it at the back because we don't actually use it in this course, BUT I realized that the Squares class the way that it stand right now, where you can grab a square and drag it around on the screen is actually just the right user interface tool for creating the three (or 4) handles that you would need to drag a spline around on the screen - which is something that I did NOT think of or do when I wrote the spline chapter a year ago.

Actually I take it back. This is work under construction. This is a placeholder for a sidebar I may include later, but probably won't, so..
SKIP on to the next chapter NOW. [next: Reaction Architecture](MJ0301.md)

So IF YOU WANT, go read the spline chapter now, which will give you the theory, then come back here and paste this code into your helper class G

--add in G 
```java
  public static Polygon poly = new Polygon();
  public static void pSpline(int xa,int ya, int xb, int yb, int xc, int yc, int n){
    if(n == 0){poly.addPoint(xa, ya); poly.addPoint(xc, yc); return;}
    int xab = (xa + xb)/2, yab = (ya+yb)/2, xbc = (xb + xc)/2, ybc = (yb+yc)/2;
    int xabc = (xab + xbc)/2, yabc = (yab + ybc)/2;
    pSpline(xa, ya, xab, yab, xabc, yabc, n-1);
    pSpline(xabc, yabc, xbc, ybc, xc, yc, n-1);
  }
```

That is the same identical spline code that I developed in chapter 8, but instead of the code that I mentioned which did random splines, add this code to paintComponent in squares

--add to paintComponent of Squares
```java
  if(LIST.size() == 4){ // we will treat the 3 squares as handles for the spline
    G.poly.reset();
    int xa = LIST.get(1).loc.x, ya = LIST.get(1).loc.y;
    int xb = LIST.get(2).loc.x, yb = LIST.get(2).loc.y;
    int xc = LIST.get(3).loc.x, yc = LIST.get(3).loc.y;
    G.pSpline(xa,ya,xb,yb,xc,yc,4);
    g.setColor(Color.BLACK);
    g.fillPolygon(G.poly);
  }
```

In the special case where the LIST is of size 4 (remember I put the background square painted WHITE as the first thing on the list) that leaves me 3 squares which act as handles for a spline. I just look at the location of the upper left of squares 1,2 and 3 as the three control points of the spline and I call the G helper to crunch that into a polygon and I fill it with BLACK. When you create your first 3 squares you might want to reduce them to a smaller size so they look more like handles but of course that is not necessary.

Grab the 3 squares and drag them around and see the types of shapes that you can get with the simple spline code.

Next up, Reactions.