## MidJava 2-4 Interactivity [&LT;](MJ0203.md) [&GT;](MJ0205.md) 
# Many Squares
Much like we did in our paint class, we want our squares app to keep track of a bunch of squares. A VS is a single rectangle, but a VS does not have the notion of color, so we are going to create a helper class in Squares that will be the functionality of a single Square and then we will nest in that class, a class that represents a list of squares. Thus we will have the following classes: Squares, Squares.Square, and Squares.Square.List so we will want to add this to our Squares class:

```java
  public static class Square extends G.VS{
    public Color c = G.rndColor();
    public Square(int x, int y){super(x,y,100,100);}
    
    public static class List extends ArrayList<Square>{
      public void draw(Graphics g){for(Square s : this){s.fill(g, s.c);}}
    }
  }
```
  
You can see that we have fixed our square size at 100 by 100 (more magic numbers, GROSS!). And you can see that our Lists are able to draw themselves.

In order to verify that we can construct and paint squares, modify paintComponent and mousePressed like this:

```java
  public static Square.List daList = new Square.List();
    
  protected void paintComponent(Graphics g){
    G.fillBackground(g,Color.WHITE);
    daList.draw(g);  
  }
  
  @Override
  public void mousePressed(MouseEvent me){
    daList.add(new Square(me.getX(), me.getY()));
    repaint();
  }
```

With these changes, we can now click anywhere and create and new square of some random color.

By the way, just because I am looking at the code in mousePressed, I see another thing that I could have done differently in my Square.List class. I could simplify the code in mouse Pressed by complicating the class Square.List. Since I am almost for sure ONLY going to add new Squares to the list. I could write a function that does that in the List class:

```java
    public void addNew(int x, int y){add(new Square(x,y));}
```

Now I no longer need to create a new Square in mousePressed. Instead I call

```java
  daList.addNew(me.getX(), me.getY());
```

So why am I pointing this out to you? The reason is basically this: There are some folks in the OO community that seem to have some nearly religous belief that there is always a RIGHT decision to make in where you locate things, as if some how RIGHT thinking will always come to the SAME solution to any problem. These people are wrong! 

The whole notion of continuous refinement and continuous refactoring is simply expressing the notion that there is almost always some way to make your code better and that means that your code is NOT ever the best and never will be. Even if there WAS some notion of BEST, we are talking language here and convention amoung your listeners and readers, who could be born sometime in the next century, trumps whatever YOU thought was best today. There is no BEST, there is only BETTER and GOOD ENOUGH FOR RIGHT NOW.

So even as I quickly and reflexively build things in ways that my experience tells me will work and will work well, I must still ask myself if I can make my code better. And so should you.

[new: Rubberband Rects](MJ0205.md)