## MidJava 2-2 Interactivity [&LT;](MJ0201.md) [&GT;](MJ0203.md) 
# Hit Detection
Hit detection is almost always done on rectangles because it is so easy. You just make sure that the mouse x is between the left and the right side of the rectangle and you make sure that the y is between the top and the bottom of the rectangle.

As discussed we will do this in some helper classes in G for points (V) and rectangles (VS). Add this to G:

```java
  public static void fillBackground(Graphics g, Color c){g.setColor(c); g.fillRect(0,0,3000,3000);}
  
  public static class V{
    public int x,y;
    public V(int x, int y){this.set(x,y);}
    public void set(int x, int y){this.x = x; this.y = y;}
    public void add(V v){x += v.x; y += v.y;} // vector addition
  }
  
  public static class VS{
    public V loc, size;
    public VS(int x, int y, int w, int h){loc = new V(x,y); size = new V(w,h);}
    public void fill(Graphics g, Color c){g.setColor(c); g.fillRect(loc.x,loc.y,size.x,size.y);}
    public boolean hit(int x, int y){return loc.x<=x && loc.y <=y && x<=(loc.x+size.x) && y<=(loc.y+size.y);}
  }
```
  
That first static function is just a recognition that we almost always want to start our paintComponent by clearing off the panel and setting the background color.

Yes, there are two GROSS magic numbers in that function. I am going to leave them. I am going to deal with magic numbers a bit later. Those numbers have NO meaning other than to be bigger than any screen coordinates that you are likely to ever see. I could have set them to MAXINT. I like 3000.

You will see that the class VS made use of the class V, and that the class VS has the hit detection code.

And now that I think about it. How totally bogus was it to NOT use that cool VS helper class when I was clearing out a large rectangle to fill the background. Wouldn't it have been way cooler to do it like this?

```java
  public static final VS BACKGROUND_RECT = new VS(0,0,3000,3000);
  public static fillBackground(Graphics g, Color c){BACKGROUND_RECT.fill(g,c);}
```

Well it's your G class. It's your choice. But in either case we need to test it. 

We are going to write a new application called Squares and we will use that next to test all that code that we just wrote.

[next: Squares.java](MJ0203.md) 