## MidJava 2-6 Interactivity [&LT;](MJ0205.md) [&GT;](MJ0207.md)
# Draging Boxes
## Day 3
We want to add another feature to our squares system. Right now, no matter where you click you create a new square. We want to modify it so that if you click on white space away from any other box then sure, you create a new square, BUT if you click on an existing box, instead of creating a new square you instead want to drag the square that you clicked on to someplace else.

This is pretty easy to do but there is one gotcha if you are not careful. At first glance you just want to move the loc of the Square that you are dragging to the current mouse coordinate BUT the trick is this. IF you first clicked on the box somewhere far away from the upper left corner the box will seem to jump immdiately from where it was to put the upper left corner where the mouse currently is. If you want it to seem like you are draging is a continuous motion - one where you grab the box some place near its center, and then the mouse remains stuck to the place where you grabbed it, as you move it around it - that means that you need to BIAS where you locate the box by the vector that was the displacement of your initial mouse click from the upper left. Sounds ugly in English it is easy in the code.

Just for the record, in day 2 of my in person course we DID drag boxes but we did NOT get this extra feature of doing it right that I just mentioned. So Day 3 of the course actually started in the middle of this section. For your reading convenience I have written this section AS IF we did this all at one time on one day.

First we need the routine in Square that will let me move a square.

```java
  public void move(int x, int y){loc.set(x,y);}
```

Next we will add a routine to Square.List that will run the entire list, do a hit detection on each square to see if we hit one of them. If so we will return it so that we can move it.

```java
  public Square hit(int x, int y){
    Square res = null;
    for(Square s: this){if(s.hit(x,y)){res = s;}}
    return res; 
  }
```

Note: that routine will return a null if nothing was hit, and also note that it returns the LAST thing on the list that was hit. This is not accidental behavior it is proper. We are drawing our squares in list order. This means that a later square can cover up a previous one on that list. We do NOT want to bail out of the for loop the first time we see a hit. That would make the user select the underneath box rather then the topmost one that they clicked on. Selecting the last one matches the drawing order. An alternate way to do this this same thing (pointed out by one of my students) is to search the list in reverse order. If you do that, then you can bail out as soon as you find the first hit.

Next we create a static V that will hold the mouseDelta and a static boolean to distinguish between our two behaviors, we are either dragging an existing box around OR we are rubberbanding a new box.

```java  
  private static boolean dragging = false;
  private static G.V mouseDelta = new G.V(0,0); // we will overwrite this coordinate in mousePressed.
```

And finally we fix up our two mouse routines so that they do the right thing:

```java
  public void mousePressed(MouseEvent me){
    int x = me.getX(), y = me.getY();
    daSquare = daList.hit(x,y);
    if(daSquare == null){
      dragging = false; 
      daSquare = new Square(x,y);
      daList.add(daSquare);
    } else {
      dragging = true;
      mouseDelta.set(daSquare.loc.x - x, daSquare.loc.y - y); // note if I add md to mouse I get ul
    }
    repaint();
  }
  
  public void mouseDragged(MouseEvent me){
    int x = me.getX(), y = me.getY();
    if(dragging){
      daSquare.move(x + mouseDelta.x, y + mouseDelta.y);
    }else{
      daSquare.resize(x,y);
    }
    repaint();
  }
  
Check it out!
```

[next: Animation](MJ0207.md)