## MidJava 2-1 Interactivity [&LT;](MJ0109.md) [&GT;](MJ0202.md)
# Graphics Helpers
## Day 2

We are going to start adding helper functions to our G class. I could tell you in advance some of the functions that I have found helpful in the past, however in keeping with the notion that these are YOUR helpers I will resist adding something to the helper class, G, until we actually need it. But in the interests of disclosure I will outline the things that I have found useful in the past and that I KNOW we will be building.

# V

This is a class that matches awt.Point. It essentially is for holding a single coordinate pair (x,y). I prefer small names so it is V as in "2D Vector". Among the helpers that will eventually go into this class will be ones to allow us to add vectors component wise.

# VS

This class represents the information that you need for a rectangle. It is a Vector and a Size. We will keep it as two vectors, loc and size. We will eventually use this class for hit detection i.e. detecting if a mouse click was within the bounds of the rectangle.

# LoHi

This class keeps track of two ints, one low and one high, these will represent the endpoints of a range of values. A single LoHi object can be used for keeping track of the bounds on an evergrowing set of values (in other words the LoHi is expanding to include each data value as it comes in) OR a single LoHi can be used to constraing or restrict values in order to force them to be within a given range. We will mostly be using LoHi objects when we build Bounding Boxes.

# BBox

A BBox consists of two LoHi ranges, one for horizontal extents and one for vertical extents. This will eventually be useful for figuring out how large an input polyline is so that we can scale it down to a standard size.

# PL

This class is used for Polylines. We could/should have used it for the Paths that we created in the Paint class in Day 1, but I wasn't quite ready to force you into using helpers. 

There may well be other classes that we add to G later, but that is enough for now. So if you want, you can populate G with the above nested classes and we will flesh in the details later.

```java
  public static class V{}
  public static class VS{}
  public static class LoHi{}
  public static class BBox{}
  public static class PL{}
```

The fact is, when you are doing your first developement it is NOT very clear where you should put things and that is perfectly OK. 

We will often write code for some application in the sandbox, specific to that application. Then, later when we are working on some other toy for the sandbox, we notice that we are doing the same thing all over again and that triggers our Spider Sense to see if we should extract the code into a helper. 

G is the Generic bucket where we put functions that are so simple that they can be reused in many places. WHEN we need something more complicated for a more specific place we MIGHT consider extending some G class and adding application specific features to the extension.

Where we are going to try to go in day 2 is to introduce some more general graphics tricks that you have certainly seen in applications even if you don't know the names of the tricks.

The activities that we are going to try to do are rubberband rectangles, rubberband lines, hit detection, handle dragging and possibly splines if we get to it.

So let's get started. 

 [next: Hit Detection](MJ0202.md)
