## MidJava 3-3 Reaction Architechture [&LT;](MJ0302.md) [&GT;](MJ0304.md)
# Vocabulary
## Interfaces
We will have 4 interfaces - I.Act, I.React, I.Show, I.Area

Like most interfaces, they are so simple I can just show you the code. And yes, you should go ahead add this to your project.

### I.java
```java
  import java.awt.Graphics;

  public interface I {
    public interface Act{public void act();}
    //public interface React extends Act{public int bid(Stroke s);}
    public interface Show{public void show(Graphics g);}
    public interface Area{ // we've already seen this one
      public boolean hit(int x, int y);
      public void pressed(int x, int y);
      public void dragged(int x, int y);
      public void released(int x, int y);
    }    
  }
```
  
I commented out the React interface because it refers to a class, Stroke, that we have not defined yet. With any luck I will remember to tell you to uncomment that line when we finally need it.
  
## Output Level, 2 classes - Mass, Layer
The output of a typical application can be quite large - think music notation; you have beams, stems, head, accidentals, clefs, staff lines, ledgers, measures, ties, slurs, mordents, guitar chords... the list goes on. But those are all application specific. The framework itself has practically nothing on the output side, just a few helper routines that will be used over and over by any particular application. 

I already mentioned the main one, the abstract class **Mass** which holds reactions. Every one of those music things that I mentioned above probably gets its own class in a music application and since every one of those is something that you would render onto the screen and that would hang onto reactions (for example: you draw a note head on a staff and the staff had a reaction to recognize a note head and put it on the staff. The note head that you just added is a new Mass and does not yet have a stem so it has a cloud of reactions that look for stems being added to the note head).

Because every music element renders and hangs onto a cloud of reactions all those music element classes will descend from Mass. And Mass is abstract because a Mass all by itself does not have any idea what it should render. The job of the Mass, the thing that it frees up every single one of those music classes from doing is the business of hanging onto a list of reactions, groveling though that list on every input to see if one of the reactions fires off, etc. Every music element should just inherit all that Reaction management code.

The one other output function that shows up in nearly every GUI application is **Layers**. IF all you are doing is presenting a single thing in black and white, layering is mostly unnecessary. As soon as you introduce color, then you need to deal with the "Painter's Algorithm" also know as "Z-Ordering" your output. 

All this means is that you want to paint background objects first and foreground objects later so that the foreground objects appear on top of or in front of the background objects. Clearly you can have more than just two layers.

In the music app I typically used 4 or 5 - Staff lines will be in the deep background (Layer zero), things on the staff like note heads will go in the next layer, things like ties, slurs, hairpins that look like editorial comments on top of the music go in layer 3, Genuine user added mark up e.g. scribbling on top of the the page go in layer 4 and finally handles and buttons and other UI controls need to appear in front of even the scribbling that the user did - it would NOT not good to have the button that deletes the user's scribbling hidden underneath all that scribbling.

## App Level - App, Window, Area, Undo

  0. **App** - the app holds the Undo stack, the list of masses, and the list of Areas
  2. **Window** - the Swing garbage
  2. **Area** - Areas are basically the mouse Listeners, you may need several different kinds.
  2. **Undo** - a list of I.Act objects, you can rebuild the entire world by redoing the Undo list


## Shape Recognition - Polyline, BoundingBox, Shape, Stroke(or Gesture)
Without going into the details yet of how we do shape recognition, or even what shapes we expect to recognize, we can list the classes that are necessary for collecting the pen input to the screen and which we will recognize into shapes and strokes.

  0. **PL** - this is a polyline, just a sequence of xy-coordinates drawn on screen from mouse down to mouse up.
  2. **BBox** - A single PL is bounded above, below, left and right. The box tracks those numbers.
  2. **Norm** - this is a PL that has been reduced to a normalized coordinate system so that comparison is possible.
  2. **Shape** - a shape is a concept like the letter 'a' or a 'E-S'. There may be several diffent ways to draw a single shape so it will probably be a list of Norms
  2. **Stroke** - A Shape is just virtual, normalized coordinates. A Stroke on the other hand is the combination of the shape that was recognized, AND the rectangle that tells you where on the screen and what size it was. So Shapes are theoretical and Stroke are actually located at a place on the screen. It is the difference between "I am thinking of the number 7" - Shape vs. "I want the number 7 written right !ithere in a 12 point font" - Stroke. 
  

Please note: in this system we have settled on the notion that we will recognize Gestures into Shapes. We do NOT technically recognize characters. The difference is just that some characters like 'x' and 't' require two strokes to draw them. The great bulk of what we want to recognize we can do with single simple strokes so we left it at that rather than do anything special to generalize up to multi-stroke characters. Technically in our system if you wanted to recognize an 'x' you would first recognize a '\' create a Mass that is a backslash, that Mass would create a reaction looking for a forward slash that crossed the existing backslash which could upgrade the backslash to an 'x'. Thus there is nothing that prevents us from recognizing multi stroke characters, but we have done NOTHING in the architecture to make it easy to recognize English text for you. Recognition of text is NOT the application that we are trying to support and it is NOT what this framework was built to do.

We also have the very standard very low level graphics helpers like **V** and **VS** that hold Points (Vectors) or Rectangles (Vector & Size)

[next: Shape Recognition](MJ0304.md)