## MidJava 3-5 Reaction Architechture [&LT;](MJ0304.md) [&GT;](MJ0401.md)

# Compass Gestures
Compass Gestures are just a set of easy to recognize shapes.

One of the things that we learned while working on the handwriting recognition system at Microsoft is that a keyboard is a WONDERFUL input device! When a user types the wrong key and gets the wrong letter they always say to themselves - "oops, I messed up and hit the wrong key." they NEVER appear to say, "Hey, this system is screwed up and didn't recognize what I was typing." 

On the other hand, when the user gets to handwrite characters and the system gets the wrong result, it is nearly always perceived as a system screw up rather than as user entry error. 

Basically, with stupid devices like keyboards and hammers, a mistake was OBVIOUSLY cockpit error because there was only ONE intelligent agent in the transaction. No one to blame but yourself. However, when a smart AI recognition system becomes involved in the transaction, SUDDENLY mistakes are never the fault of the human; Oh no, it is always the fault of that STUPID AI! 

It is the JOB of the UI designer to understand these very human behaviors and to design and build interfaces that live successfully within that context.

One of the ways to help achieve that success is to choose a set of shapes that are a) easy for the user to draw and that are b) pretty distinct from one another so that the user can be fairly sure that the system will recognize them with very few mistakes. 

The Compass Gestures are the set that I came up with to achieve this. 

Note: there is NOTHING in the code that we will write to recognize shapes that REQUIRES that you use compass gestures. If you want to use letters like 'a' and 'e' (or other one stroke characters) in your app, all you will need to do is enter the prototypes for them and there you go. However, I believe that high recognition accuracy is a VERY important feature and the compass gestures are a way to easily achieve that feature.

## 3 Types of Strokes
The compass gestures are a collection of strokes which land in one of these three categories:

1. Circles, big and small. Big ones are called circles and really small ones are called dots
2. Single straight lines in one of the eight compass directions (N, S, E, W, NW, SW, NE, SE)
2. Idealized V-shapes i.e. a straight line in one compass direction followed immediately by straight line in another compass direction. e.g. the letter 'V' the way that we would normal draw it is = SE-NE or if you draw it backwards it would be SW-NW, the greater than sign, &gt; is typically drawn SE-SW if you draw from the top down (or NE-NW from the bottom up),  the letter 'L' is S-E (or W-N).

For simplicity in naming these shape, I named all the straight lines in the second category as if they were V-shapes where the second compass direction just happens to match the first direction, thus my name for a single line N is actually N-N.

## Direction Matters
Please note that direction IS important in this system. For example a single vertical stroke may be drawn either bottom up (N-N) or top down (S-S). In a similar manner, any distinct visual V-shape will have two differently distinguished drawing methods. Thus when I NAME a compass gesture I am NOT describing a visual result (like a vertical line), instead I am actually describing the drawing order, (vertical line from the top down). So even though N-N LOOKS the same as S-S when the stroke is finished, the computer can easily tell the different from a stroke that was drawn going up versus one that was drawn down.

Since there are eight different compass directions and two directions per V-shape there are 8*8 = 64 different V-shapes. If you then add in the dot and the circle, you have a vocabulary of 66 easily distinguishable shapes recognized by this recognizer. That in effect become the 'character set' for our gesture keyboard.

The advantage of this recognizer is that the definition and direction of each shape is unambiguous and while it is possible to get recognition mistakes when you are drawing rapidly, if you are careful, it is almost impossible to make a mistake. Furthermore, you can do the same thing that I have done here, namely give names to the shapes and expect the user to understand what shape you are talking about. Whereas a shape like 'C' you would need to qualify: "Do you mean C drawn from the top down or from the bottom up."

## Multiple Prototypes for a single gesture
Please note: the compass gestures are not magic. One can get into trouble if one is not careful (When I say, 'One', I am talking about your users here). Consider an 'L' shape (Sorry, I mean a S-E shape!) 

I could draw it symmetrically where both legs of the V are of equal length. OR I could draw a long down leg and then only a short one going East or alternatively I could have a short down stroke and a long east one. Clearly, at some point our system will fail. That short down - long east V-stroke sure looked a lot like and E-E with maybe a little hook at the start. 

If your users do NOT Train the system with prototypes that hold the genuine VARIENCE with which they draw S-E shapes, the system won't recognize a ShortS-LongE stroke very well and if they DO train in a lot of those, then they MAY start to have problems recognizing a genuine E-E stroke. Training your users to do the right thing is a problem that all application developers must live with. I can't assure you that I know how to do that, what I can assure you is that I have almost no problems recognizing my compass gestures because I do understand how this system works and I do not try to train it to do impossible recognition tasks. 

## The Necessity of Undo
I do have a last comment on the Compass Gestures but it is really a comment on the necessity of **UNDO** in any recognition based system.

Recognition based systems are NEVER 100% accurate and thus in addition to user mistakes (which are mostly rare) you will have some recognition mistakes (which when properly designed are also rare BUT which are unfortunately EXTREMELY ANNOYING to users!). It MUST be very easy to undo both of these types of mistakes. I mean, let's face facts, the second most commonly pressed key on a keyboard after space is BackSpace, the "oops I need to undo the last char typed" button. Undo is just a property of good UI design, not some peculiarity of recognition systems.

However, in a gesture based system, you have an additional problem. You will most likely be performing that Undo action as a result of yet another gesture! - WOE BE UNTO YOU if you design your system in such a way that you occasionally make recognition mistakes on the Undo gesture itself! That Undo gesture had better be the most easily recognizable - Correctly recognized - gesture in the system.

It is **STRONGLY** recommended that you reserve one single unambiguous easy to recognize shape, like a single upward stroke (N-N) performed ANYWHERE on the screen, and then EXCLUSIVELY reserve that shape as the undo gesture. Don't screw up Undo! 

In my music system I used N-N, the un-natural upward stroke, for this purpose and I would recommend using that stroke for ANY system, not just Music. The N-N stroke has the nice feature that it is an un-natural stroke in any normal pen or pencil writing system because regardless of whether you are left or right handed, pulling a stylus down on paper is generally easier than pushing it upwards. As a result there is very little conflict between that single upward stroke and any natural writing system.

That should be enough outlining of where we are trying to go with this Reaction Architecture. Time to start writing some code!
 
 [next: Chapter 4 Recognition Subsystem](MJ0401.md)