## MidJava 3-2 Reaction Architecture [&LT;](MJ0301.md) [&GT;](MJ0303.md)

## The Problem of Context?

One of the problems of any pattern recognition system is to how deal with the problem of context.

Let us consider the music notation input system. Suppose you draw a vertical line. That vertical line has several possible interpretations in a music system. It could be an up-stem on a note head, it could be a down-stem on a note head, it could be a measure bar. Similarly a horizontal line could be a staffline, a ledger line, a beam between two stems, a hyphen in the lyrics, a tie between two note heads. How do you determine the intended meaning?

The basic answer is: context. If your vertical line went from the top line of a staff to the bottom line of a staff that is exactly what a measure bar should do, so it is probably a measure bar. On the other hand, if your vertical line passed exactly to the right of a note head that needed a stem it is probably an up-stem for that note. However, problems remain. What if the stroke doesn't go EXACTLY from top line to bottom line, what does "exactly to the right" mean? Yet another problem is what should you do if both criteria hold? What if the line mostly goes from the top line to a bottom line so it should be a measure bar AND it also goes right by a notehead at the same time and thus should be a stem?

The basic notion is that your context decisions should be done in a probabilistic manner. Instead of just having a simple threshold that returns a boolean, for example "if the top y coordinate of your vertical bar was within 10 pixels of the top line of a staff AND blah blah THEN it is a Measure bar"; you instead build a distance function (a Metric) that measures how close you are to meeting the conditions. If you meet them perfectly you return 0, if you are close but not exact you return a small number, if you are not close you return a big number, and if you don't like the match at all you return a HUGE number, a NO_BID number. This distance function allows you to easily decide between dueling contexts. "The distance between your vertical input stroke and a perfect measure bar is 17. On the other hand the distance between your input stroke and a perfect up-stem was 29 - clearly the measure bar was the closer interpretation so use that one."

This one simple notion - using a distance metric for all your context evaluation and allowing the best context match to win the rights to interpret the stroke - is the fundamental idea that underlies the reaction architecture. There are of course many other components which we will cover in time but this one is the heart of the matter. So now I will leave the language of a specific music example behind and describe the process AGAIN in general terms using the Reaction vocabulary (Some class names and interface names) to describe the architecture.

## Reaction Vocabulary

Let us suppose that the user has already drawn some stuff on the screen leaving it in some partially completed state. There will be some visible stuff on the screen. We will call each visible item a **Mass**. 

In java terms: abstract class Mass implements **I.Show**. Showable items are generally masses. I use the term Mass because I think of the visible items on the screen as being similar to planetary masses complete with gravitational fields. 

The masses are in some sense contexts that are trying to suck in the user's input strokes - the closer the input gets to a mass the more likely it is that the mass will attract the stroke. 

The user, who is looking at all those masses on the screen will draw some stroke, a **Gesture**, which may be far from any of the masses, it may be related to a single mass, it may be a connection between a pair of masses, it may even just be a single up/down click on a button. 

The Gesture which the user draws will in general be recognized into a **Shape**. Each Mass on the screen will have its own private collection of **Reactions**. A reaction object is just something that has a "bid" routine that gets to look at the stroke and bids for how badly it wants to interpret the stroke. (The bids are just those distance functions; zero is a perfect match, a perfect bid, while larger numbers reflect less interest). 

All the Masses hang onto Reactions which bid on the input stroke and the winning bid gets to interpret the stroke. Thus a Reaction is something typically owned by a Mass and which implements an **I.React** interface. I.React is nothing other than the two functions, bid(Gesture s) and act(Gesture s).

The **act** routine in a reaction is of course free to do anything it wants but typically it will either add some new Mass to the screen or it may just modify the Mass that owned the Reaction.

If you are familiar with the notion of parsing in a traditional language, parsing is mostly done by having a finite state machine (the machine is always in some single state - a number) and when each new character comes in, the parser gets to look at the input character and based on its current state it gets to shift to another state. (If you want the extra vocabulary: the **StateMachine** is a **DirectedGraph** where the **Nodes** are labled with the **StateNumbers** and the directed edges leaving the Node are labled with **characters** - thus if you are in a given state, sitting on one node, and you see a particular character, you follow the edge leaving from that node and end up on a new node - i.e. you have performed a state transition)  

What we are doing here in **2D Parsing** is an extension of that one dimensional notion of parsing. Each different mass is essentially a pile of reactions (those are all the state transitions that that a single mass could possibly perform). Now that cloud of reactions (possible transitions) are are essentially the state of that mass, just hiding behind the scenes and waiting for an input character. When a stroke comes in, every one of those masses on the screen gets a chance to bid for how badly it wants to be the one to consume that stroke input. There will be at most one wining reaction and that is the state transition that will be fired by the input stroke.

Thus from the viewpoint of traditional language parsing, a Reaction object is a state transition that is hanging around invisibly in the background waiting to happen. The only difference is that in traditional parsing, from whatever state you are currently in, there is only one transition that you can take if you see the letter 'a'. In our 2D parser, from the one state you are in (every thing currenly on the screen), there may be several different Reactions hanging around all watching for the letter 'a' and they will bid for the right to be the winning transition.

I think at this point I will just wade into vocabulary, most of which is just names of classes or interfaces because, no surprise, nearly every different thing that we needed to do in the system required some type of object in order to fill that role, so our class names are pretty much an outline of all the roles that need to be filled.

[next: ](MJ0303.md)