## MidJava 4-11 Recognition Subsystem [&LT;](MJ0410.md) [&GT;](MJ0412.md)
# Serialization

Among the many BAD names in the CS world this is one of the worst, but EVERYONE in the industry uses it so get used to it. What it means is this: 

Imagine you have a big complex application like Excel, some monster spreadsheet with numbers and formulae and column widths which the user has created is, in memory, made up of hundreds or thousands of objects.

There they are sitting in memory, scattered around, little collections of data values and pointers to other objects that hold more data. It is a GRAPH - a large collection of node and edges with pretty much random access to any object or any node. 

When you want to save it all to disk,  those disk files consist of one ascii character written after another. Disk files are essentialy serial datastructures instead of random access ones. You must somehow convert that GRAPH that is all the objects in your spreadsheet into a single serial list of ascii characters so that you can save it to file, AND you want code that goes the other way as well, reading a serial string of characters and unpacking them all back into a pile of random access data objects in memory.

It sounds horribly messy and in a sense it is. Every object needs to be able to write itself out to disk AND since your graph could easily have loops (there is certainly no problem in code with having two different ways to get at the same object, it is even desireable to have multiple paths through your data). You will want to NOTICE when you have already written out one object and when you need to write it again you want to REFER to some previously written object rather than writing it all out again.

Fortunately, this is something that EVERY object needs to do and that means that you ought to put this code into Object and hey, that class was already written for you. Java has serialization built into the object class.

All you need to do is declare the classes that you want to be able to write out as implementing Serializable and then they can be serialized. Most of the Java Library classes like ArrayList and the like are already marked as Serializable so you just need to do this for the classes that you want to write. I did this for Shape, Shape.Prototype, Shape.Prototype.List, V, VS, PL, HiLo, BBox, Ink, Ink.Norm

### implement Serializable in classes listed above


That is step 1. 

The next step is to open up a file, make it into an object stream, and then you can write objects out into that file. Finally to load things back, you can open the file and read the objects back IN THE SAME ORDER THAT YOU WROTE THEM. I find that last condition to be troublesome. What if you change what you write to the file and forget to change the code that reads them back in. TOO SCARY - the easy thing to do is to NEVER write an object file with more than one object. What I mean is just this. Suppose you ACTUALLY needed to write 3 objects out to the file like A,B and C. Easy - build a class Foo with 3 members, A, B and C. Construct a new Foo(A,B,C) and write that one Foo object out to the file. When you want A,B & C back just read in the one Foo object and there they are in nice random access order just as GOD intended.

I never remember how to do this. I mean how to do serialization, But it is always the same so I just go copy code from whatever I wrote last that needed to Serialize. I wrote the stubs for these in the Shape class, time to upgrade them to actual serialization code.

```java
  public static HashMap<String, Shape> DB = loadShapeDB(UC.fullPathToShapeDB);
  public static Shape DOT = DB.get("DOT");
  public static Collection<Shape> LIST = DB.values();  // this collection backed by DB, so changes to DB show up here
  
  public static HashMap<String, Shape> loadShapeDB(String filename){
    HashMap<String, Shape> res = new HashMap<>(); // assume we will fail and set it to the blank DB
    res.put("DOT", new Shape("DOT"));
    try{
      System.out.println("attempting DB load..");
      ObjectInputStream ois = new ObjectInputStream(new FileInputStream(filename));
      res = (HashMap<String, Shape>) ois.readObject();
      System.out.println("Successful load - found" + res.keySet());
      ois.close();
    } catch(Exception e) {
      System.out.println("Load failed.");
      System.out.println(e);
    }
    return res;
  }
  public static void saveShapeDB(String filename){
    try{
      ObjectOutputStream oos = new ObjectOutputStream(new FileOutputStream(filename));
      oos.writeObject(DB);
      System.out.println("Saved " + filename);
      oos.close();
    } catch(Exception e) {
      System.out.println("Failed database save");
      System.out.println(e);
    }
  }
```

Now that we have a function to call that will save the database, I need to call it from somewhere. What I decided to do was to add a line to the keyTyped routine. IF the user types an ASCII CR or LF (13 or 10) I not only clear out the curName, but I also save the database.

### add to keyTyped
```java
    if(c == 0x0D || c == 0x0A){Shape.saveShapeDB(UC.fullPathToShapeDB);}
```

## WARNING!

And now the BIG warning that comes with serialization, and here I am just propagating the warning that comes in the Java Docs.

Basically they tell you that you should NOT do what we just did, EXCEPT as an engineer testing your stuff out, and they are right. There are several problems. ONE - if you EVER change any of the fields in any of the classes that you serialized out, well, in that case whatever you saved previously is now in a different form, it is incompatible with what you now want and can no longer be read back in. I believe that the serialization methods in Java ATTEMPTS to detect that the class that you are reading back has a different hash code from the one that you saved out so that at least you get an exception thrown when you try to read.

Secondly, even if you did NOT change any of the fields, but just gave someone your source code AND your serialized file there is NO assurance that data that was serialized on one machine with its JVM can be read by the same Java code running on a different machine which may have a different architecture and thus a different Java Virtual Machine. 

The warning is that, while you can use the built in Serialization system to serialize on your machine to create files that you can use, you should NOT assume that you have created a file format that you can use to transport files from one machine to another. Serialization as provided automatically by Java should NOT be considered a DEPLOYMENT solution. IF you want a genuine file format where users can trade files, then you MUST design and  write your own PROPER serialization format.

[next: Test Recognition](MJ0412.md)