## MidJava 4-7 Recognition Subsystem [&LT;](MJ0406.md) [&GT;](MJ0408.md)

# Refactoring & Renaming

As you know, software evolves, you choose names, you write code and then one day (like today for example) you wake up, look at your names and wonder why you choose the ones that you did. Wouldn't different names be better. And of course the same is true for location of code, yesterday you filed things over there today you want them filed over here.

Fortunately, most modern IDEs are able to do this refactoring for you. 

Today, I thought about how I wanted to write the next chunk of code, looked at some old code that I wrote years ago to see how I had done things in the past and saw some better names. (Usually, new guy, the today programmer, is much smarter than old guy - you know, more experience, able to see bugs that old guy missed. BUT NOT ALWAYS!) In my **I.Area** code here I use names like **pressed**, **dragged**, and **released** which of course SUGGESTED the names mousePressed, mouseDragged, mouseReleased. I didn't want to use those identical names because I don't want to confuse you that an Area object is actually a MouseListener.

However in some other old code I had used the names **dn**, **drag**, **up** - much simpler, shorter and in my mind equally clear names. So this made me think about changing my **I.Area** code and this left me with a problem. The problem is that the change is trivial in my code base. In less than a minute I can change thosee names in my **I.Area** code and the IDE will ripple those changes through the entire code base. I should just do it right?

Unfortunately, I am also writing a book here and this book is NOT embedded in an IDE with refactoring tools. I have extracted code samples and scattered them all through these stinking markdown files.

So do I go back now and re-edit all of them and HOPE that I find every single reference to those names, both in my code AND in my book here where I describe what the code does? Do I PRETEND that those were the names that I had selected all along -OR- do I just ignore those short names and stay with the longer names: pressed, dragged, released?

I mean seriously, are those short names REALLY that much better? I should probably just leave the code the way it is.

And that, my friends, is what I CAN NOT DO! I am a programmer. I **live** to change code. When I see a fix that I want to make, I DON'T spend my time agonizing over the amount of work it will take to change it. The code MUST be the BEST that it can be. My effort and pain and Labor does not matter, the CODE gets to choose how it wants to be organized. I am just the AGENT that helps the code be what it can be. My code WANTS those names to be changed and I must comply.

Fortunately (or unfortunately depending on your viewpoint) a THIRD possibility has occured to me - Since this is a TEACHING course THIS book is NOT just about presenting a code base for the Reaction Architecture, rather it is a diary about HOW an intermediate programmer, such as yourself, actaully goes about building a code base like this, and one of the things that WILL happen to you is that you will get to some point and need to make change, like renaming something. Happens to me ALL THE TIME. 

In da olden time, (I mean puched cards), renaming was WAY more painful than it is now, you really DID need to go over your entire code, locate every single place you used an old word and edit it into the new one. Nowdays you just do it and don't even think about it. So that is what we will do. Go change the names in your **I.Area** code to dn,drag, and up. I'll wait here.

See, easy. Your new code base is better, MY code base is better. It is only this DOCUMENT, this BOOK, that is now out of date. And now I won't worry about this problem any longer. WHEN I decide that the first name that I selected for some UC name was no good, I will just fix it. I WILL NOT make ANY attempt to PRETEND that I had the foresight to select that better name in the first place. 

[next: Shape Trainer](MJ0408.md)