## MidJava 4-5 Recognition Subsystem [&LT;](MJ0404.md) [&GT;](MJ0406.md)
# Norms
## Day 6

We are mostly going to move everything that we were doing in our ink constructor into a static nested class called Norm. And we are going to change Ink so that it no longer extends PL.

We will need a coordinate size for our normalized coordinates. 1000 should give us plenty of resolution and yet still be small enough so that when we start squaring them and adding them to compute euclidean distances the distance numbers will on the order of several million which will fit easily into the billion range of a 32 bit integer. So add this to UC.

```java
  public static final int normCoordMax = 1000;
```

The Norm class in Ink will look like this: (And you will see that the Norm constructor is basically what we used to have for Ink.)

### nest Norm in Ink
```java
  public static class Norm extends G.PL{
    public static final int N = UC.normSampleSize, MAX = UC.normCoordMax;
    public static final G.VS NCS = new G.VS(0,0,MAX,MAX); // the coordinate box for Transforms
    public Norm(){
      super(N);
      G.PL temp = BUFFER.subSample(N);
      G.V.T.set(BUFFER.bbox, NCS);
      temp.transform();
      for(int i = 0; i<N; i++){this.points[i].set(temp.points[i]);}
    }
  }
```

Now unlike Ink, Norms can't show themselves. They are in an abstract coordinate system. However, we can show them AT some place if we have a VS so we will add a drawAt routine for our Norms:

### add to Norm
```java
    public void drawAt(Graphics g, G.VS vs){ // expands Norm to fit in vs
      G.V.T.set(NCS, vs); // prepare to move from normalized CS to vs
      for(int i = 1; i<N; i++){
        g.drawLine(points[i-1].tx(), points[i-1].ty(), points[i].tx(), points[i].ty());
      }
    }
```

And now we will modify Ink to consist of two fields, a Norm and a VS. Ink will implement I.Show and an Ink object will show itself by calling the norm's showAt routine.

### modify Ink
```java
  public class Ink implements I.Show{
    public Norm norm;
    public G.VS vs;
    public static Buffer BUFFER = new Buffer();

    public Ink(){
      norm = new Norm(); // automatically loads from BUFFER
      vs = BUFFER.bbox.getNewVS(); // where the ink was on the screen
    }
    public void show(Graphics g){g.setColor(UC.inkColor); norm.drawAt(g,vs);}     
```

Nothing has really changed, we have just moved where we used to do things in Ink over to where we want do do them in Norm. 

(Well, technically, once I tested I realized that I broke something with those changes. Ink used to be a PL. Ink used to have a size. I was printing the size of the Ink, just to see what it was, over in the paintComponent routine in PaintInk. However, now that Ink is just a Norm and all norms are the same size, I should remove that print statement from paintComponent.)

So we are ready to start adding to the Norm class. In particular we want to make it possible for a Norm to compare itself to another Norm.

### add to Norm
```java
    public int dist(Norm n){
      int res = 0;
      for(int i = 0; i<N; i++){
        int dx = points[i].x - n.points[i].x, dy = points[i].y - n.points[i].y;
        res += dx*dx + dy*dy;
      }
      return res;
    }
```

We will test that by modifying our PaintInk app to print to the screen the distance between the last two
elements on the inkList - so add to paintComponent:

### add to paintComponent in PaintInk
```java
    if(inkList.size()>1){
      int last = inkList.size()-1;
      int dist = inkList.get(last).norm.dist(inkList.get(last-1).norm);
      g.setColor(dist>500000?Color.RED:Color.BLACK); // black for same red for different
      g.drawString("Dist: "+dist, 600, 60);
    }
```

What we are looking for here with those distance numbers is this: Two shapes that are supposed to be the same should be close to one another. So if you draw two v's in a row the distance should be small, but if you draw a 'v' followed by an 'L' that distance should be large. I used the number 500K as a distinguishing number. I don't know if that number is even close to right.

I want to eventually construct a new UC integer, namely noMatchDist. Basically if the distance between two Norms is greater than noMatchDist then there is no way that I want to consider those two shapes to be the same. So I had this code write the numbers in Black if they might possibly be considered to be the same shape, but colered red if they should NOT be considered a match.

In fact, since I know that that is what I want to figure out, I should have added this value to UC:

```java
  public static final int noMatchDist = 500000;
```

And then had this line in the code that I slipped into paintComponent in PaintInk:

```java
  g.setColor(dist>UC.noMatchDist?Color.RED:Color.BLACK); // black for same red for different
```

What we are doing with that noMatchDist is limiting our nearest neighbor matching. Nearest neighbor takes an input point and DECLARES it to be the same type as whatever its nearest neighbor was. We are going to eliminate matches to neighbors that are farther than noMatchDist away. We would rather return a NULL match than match something that is much too far away. So when we everntually tune this number, it will be to make a trade off from how often we returned a null as a result of our match vs returning something that doesn't match particulary well.

But now that we have working normalized coordinates we can start in on the next class that we will need to build, Shape.

 [next: Shape](MJ0406.md)