## MidJava 4-6 Recognition Subsystem [&LT;](MJ0405.md) [&GT;](MJ0407.md)
# Shape

A **Shape** is an abstract notion, mostly a name, like 'O' or 'S-E'. There may be many different ways to draw a single sahpe. For example you could draw your 'O' clockwise from the top, or counter-clockwise from the top, or possibly from the bottom. Those ACTUAL different ways of drawing that shape will be called called **Prototypes**. So in our system a Shape will actually be a Prototype List that has a name. A single Prototype is basically a Norm. Here is the outline of the Shape class that you should build now.

### Shape.java
```java
  public class Shape{
    public Prototype.List prototypes = new Prototype.List();
    public String name;
    public Shape(String name){this.name = name;}
    public static class Prototype extends Ink.Norm {
      int nBlend = 1;
      public static class List extends ArrayList<Prototype>{}
    }
  }
```

We have a field **nBlend** in Prototype so that we can average together several Norms in order to smooth them out. The nBlend keeps track of how many numbers you have averaged together so that you can incrementally modify the average. If you have not see this incremental average trick before, it is both simple and convenient.

Normally in order to average n numbers together, I first add them and divide by n, so AVG = (a1+a2+a3+...+an)/n

Suppose however that I have that average number and then along comes a new number X that I want to include in that average. IF I know how many numbers, n, were in the previous collection then I can incrementally update an existing average and add in one more element. Basically newAvg = (n*OldAv + newVal)/(n+1).

So we will add a blend routine into G.V to do this for a single V

### in G.V
```java
  public void blend(V v, int k){set((k*x + v.x)/(k+1), (k*y + v.y)/(k+1));}
```

And once you can do it for a single V, you can do it for every V in the list of points in a Norm

### in Ink.Norm
```java
  public void blend(Norm norm, int nBlend){for(int i = 0; i<N; i++){points[i].blend(norm.points[i], nBlend);}}
```

And now that a Norm can get blended, a prototype that knows its blend count can be blended.

### in Shape.Prototype
```java
  public void blend(Ink.Norm norm){blend(norm, nBlend); nBlend++;}
```

Now the main reason that we wanted Norms was so that we could compute the distance between them and use that to find matching prototypes and thus identify the shape of a stroke. Basically we take a single new input Norm and compare it distancewise to all the prototypes in all the shapes that we have and find the best match.

This means that we are going to want a function to find the bestMatch in a list of prototypes. And in fact we will want something just like it in the list of shapes. I wrote the function so that it RETURNS the int distance of how close the match was and as a SIDE EFFECT it sets a static variable that points to the element on the list which produced that closest match.

### in Shape.Prototype.List
```java
      public static Prototype bestMatch; // this is set as a side effect when running bestDist

      public int bestDist(Ink.Norm norm){
        bestMatch = null;
        int bestSoFar = UC.noMatchDist; // assume no match
        for(Prototype p : this) {
          int d = p.dist(norm);
          if(d < bestSoFar){
            bestMatch = p;
            bestSoFar = d;
          }
        }
        return bestSoFar;
      }
```

Notice: If we can't beat the noMatchDist then this routine will find nothing and bestMatch will be null.

The other function that I want to add, both so that I can see what the prototypes on the list look like, but also so I can see how many blends make up each one, is a show routine. I basically create a box that I march across the top of the screen and draw each successive prototype in that list of boxes. So make Prototype.List implement I.Show and add this routine.

### in Prototype.List
```java
      private static int m = 10, w = 60; private static G.VS showbox = new G.VS(m,m,w,w);
      public void show(Graphics g){ // draw a list of boxes across top of screen
        g.setColor(Color.ORANGE);
        for(int i = 0; i<size(); i++){
          Prototype p = get(i); int x = m + i*(m+w);
          showbox.loc.set(x, m); // march the showbox across the top of the screen
          p.drawAt(g, showbox);
          g.drawString(""+p.nBlend,x,20);
        }
      }
```

Once we can search for matches, and can show a list we can hack up PaintInk to show us the results.

First add a static Prototype.List

### in PaintInk
```java
  public static Shape.Prototype.List pList = new Shape.Prototype.List();
```

next make sure that your draw the list in paintComponent

```java
  pList.show(g);
```

And finally hack up mouseReleased to populate the pList

```java
  public void mouseReleased(MouseEvent me){
    Ink ink = new Ink();
    inkList.add(ink);
    if(pList.bestDist(ink.norm) < UC.noMatchDist){ // we found a match so blend
      Shape.Prototype.List.bestMatch.blend(ink.norm);
    }else{
      pList.add(new Shape.Prototype()); // new Prototype
    }
    repaint();
  }
```

Note: when we run this, IF noMatch is too big, we will find matches where we don't want them and possibly be blending stuff together that are really different shapes. On the ohter hand if it is too low, it doesn't see similar shapes as being similar. It is better to err on the side of making it too small. It simply means that you will need to collect more sample prototypes in order to recognize things as opposed to recognizing things incorrectly. You would rather that your AI say that it doesn't know what something is rather than making wild guesses.

Last but not least, just for fun AND for better data compression AND for extra smoothing, modify the Ink that you JUST threw into the inkList (it is right there in the variable ink) to share the norm with the prototype that you either just blended or just created. What I mean is to replace the norm that was in the ink object with the norm from a prototype.

Think about what this will do. You draw your first character. It is an 'a'. You match nothing because it is the first thing you drew so you create a prototype for 'a'. Now throw out the ink's norm and replace it with the norm from the first prototype. Nothing has changed, the prototype's norm was just a copy of the inks norm. But now if you draw another 'a' and it matches, the prototype blends. BUT the first ink object shares that object SO the old ink object on the screen now updates to be the smoother version that you just blended.

As you keep drawing the same shape over and over, all the copies of that shape on your page keep updating.

Here is the code with that modification:

```java
  public void mouseReleased(MouseEvent me){
    Ink ink = new Ink();
    Shape.Prototype proto;
    inkList.add(ink);
    if(pList.bestDist(ink.norm) < UC.noMatchDist){ // we found a match so blend
      proto = Shape.Prototype.List.bestMatch;
      proto.blend(ink.norm);
    }else{
      proto = new Shape.Prototype();
      pList.add(proto); // new Prototype
    }
    ink.norm = proto;
    repaint();
  }
```

[next: Refactoring](MJ0407.md)