## MidJava 4-4 Recognition Subsystem [&LT;](MJ0403.md) [&GT;](MJ0405.md)

# Coordinate Transform

We need to be able to do coordinate transfomration, going both directions from screen coordinates to a normalized system and, for the purposes of rendering ink, back the other direction from a normalized coordinate system to screen coordinates.

## Scaling
So we will build a transfom system that we can think of as mapping one VS box to any other VS box. Since we are not dealing with any kinds of rotations, our transforms consist of only two Geometric operations, Translation (which is accomplished by addition of coordinates) and the other is Scaling (which is accomplished by multiplication). Now there are two very traditional ways of doing the scaling, one is called "isomorphic scaling" which uses a single scale factor for BOTH x and y, and the other is call "anisomorphic scaling" which allows x to scale differently from y.

Anisomorphic scaling - the one with two scale factors, will allow you to map a single rectangle to any other single rectangle. It can take a tall thin rectangle and squash the y and stretch the x so it becomes a short wide rectangle. This scaling does not preserve aspect ratios. Isomorphic scaling, on the other hand, does preserve the aspect ratio, any square will map to another square, and 1 by 2 brick will map to another one by two brick.

For our purposes of recognizing strokes we will want isomorphic scaling. The reason is simple: Imagine that you draw a "/" i.e. a SW-SW stroke. You could draw it almost vertically so that its height is large and its width is small, you could draw it almost horizontally so that it has large width and small height, and you could draw it as a genuine SW-SW stroke where the width and height are almost the same. IF you did anisompophic scaling when you normalized, you would stretch the width and height by different factors to make that input stroke exactly fit the diagonal of our normal coordinate system.

In other words you would turn that nearly vertical stroke, S-S, into a  SW-SW and similarly you would turn the nearly horizontal stroke W-W into a pure SW-SW. Basically anisomorphic scaling REMOVES any differences in aspect ratio from your original drawing. There may be application when that is what you want. However in this case, our compass gestures have important aspect ratio components. SO our transform will be isomorphic which means that we need a single scale factor instead of two different scale factors.

## Transform
Knowing that we are ready to start building our Transform class. Since the purpose of transforms is to transform vectors we will make this a nested class of V. Also, just because of the way that we will use them, we will build ONE single static transform, T, in the V class, which you can initialize to one value (like setting it to be the ONE single transformation that we need to convert ALL the points in the ink buffer into a norm, or instead we can set it to the single transform that we need to go from a Norm out to some place on the screen) Once set we can then use that single transform over and over until we decide to change it.

All I am doing here is recognizing that we will may well create LOTS of transforms BUT we will create one, use it to map a lot of points and then we are done with it. We will not need multiple transforms at the same time. So instead of creating LOTS of new objects and thrashing our garbage collector we will make do with one static transform.

Our Transform will just need 4 numbers
### nest into V
```java
  public static class Transform{
    int dx, dy, n, d;
  }
```
What are those fields in the transform? The single isomorphic Scale value is a fraction with a numerator, n, and a denominator, d. We then have  independent translations in the x and y direction which are the dx and dy. Here is the transform of one single old point,(x,y), converted by the transform to a new point, (x',y').

```text
  (x',y') = (x*n/d + dx, y*n/d + dy)
```

We will create one single static Transform in the V class, that we will set up once before we do a bunch of points. Most of the work that follows is what we need to do to compute the proper values of dx, dy, n and d. But first, we can write the code that will do the transforms assuming that those values are set. Here is the on static Transfrom in the V class

### add to V
```java
  public static Transform T = new Transform();
```

I then want to have methods in the V class that can use that single T to set the value of some V to be the transform of some other V.
```java
  public void setT(V v){set(v.tx(), v.ty());} 
  public int tx(){return x*T.n/T.d + T.dx;}
  public int ty(){return y*T.n/T.d + T.dy;}
```

So those helpers, tx, ty, allow setT to apply the Transform T to the single point v.

We will also want a function in PL to transform an entire PL.
```java
  public void transform(){for(int i = 0; i<points.length; i++){points[i].setT(points[i]);}}
```
# Creating Transforms
Now we need to figure out HOW to initialize a transform to do the thing that we want. We will do this by imagining that we have one box of size and location that we want to move to another box with a new size and location.

Since we will set up a transform that way we make that a set function in the Transform clsss. The version we will use all the time is to convert from the oldVS that was the bounding box of the original ink into a normalized coordinate system. But, we also want to go the other way sometimes, going from normalized coordinates out to some particular box on the screen.

  public void set(VS oVS, VS nVS){...}

The first part of our calculation will be to set up the scale, i.e. the two values n and d.

To scale a value that was in an old coordinate system, you divide the value by the old size (thus scaling it to one) and then multiplying it by the new size (thus scaling it from one up to the new size). Thus our new size is the numerator and the old size is the denominator. 

Note: in INTEGER arithmetic you MUST multiply fractions by FIRST multiplying by the numerator and then dividing by the denominator. If you do the divide first, you get truncated math and lose ALL your accuracy! You first produce a BIG result by doing a multiply and THEN do a division which will truncate and approximate.

In anisomorphic scaling, where you have 2 scale factors, one for horizontal and one for vertical, the numbers are simple. xScale = newWidth/oldWidth and yScale = newHeight/oldHeight. When we want just one scale factor we have options. We could pick one or the other. We could average the two of them, or we could force fits, which is what I will do here. 

Basically we look at the old box, and if it was not a square, we choose either the width or the height, whichever was larger. We think of that as being the SIZE of the old box. We do the same with the new box and that ratio is the single scale factor. I call it force fit, because it takes the largest value in the input box, shrinks that down to one and makes it no bigger than the largest value in the output box. Thus everything in the input box is forced to fit in the output box.

### add to Transform
```java
  public void setScale(int oW, int oH, int nW, int nH){
    n = (nW>nH)?nW:nH;  d = (oW>oH)?oW:oH;
  }
```

Next, to figure out the offsets, dx, and dy, we consider how we deal with just one single coordinate, like x.

Imagine a single line segment, starting at oX, and with width oW. We want to scale and translate it to be at nX and nW and we want the actual translation(s) to be mapping the center coordinate in the old coordinate system to the center coordinate in the new system.

The normal way to visualize performing this operation is to do it in 3 steps. first translate the original coordinates to the origin, then scale, then tranlate the origin up to the new coordinates.

```text
  x' = (x -oX -oW/2)*n/d + nX + nW/2 
```

So in that expression we first subtract oX+oW/2 which is the center of the segment to translate the center to the origin. Then we scaled about the origin, then we translate to the new center nX+nW/2.
  
As you can see, this expression is not in our ideal form of a single multiply followed by a single addition. However, now we can use algebra to simplify that above expression into one that has a single multiply followed a single final constant to add:

```text
  x' = x*n/d + ((-oX-oW/2)*n/d + nX + nW/2)
```
So that single constant expression at the back is the single dx translation value that we needed in our transform. Because the y expression looks exactly the same, except using y and Height, we will build a single helper to help us calculate the offsets.

```java
  public int setOff(int oX, int oW, int nX, int nW){
    return (-oX-oW/2)*n/d + nX + nW/2;
  }
```

Finally, with these helpers we can flesh out the details of the set function that creates the transform that move us from an oldVS to a newVS:

```java
  public void set(VS oVS, VS nVS){
    setScale(oVS.size.x, oVS.size.y, nVS.size.x, nVS.size.y);
	  dx = setOff(oVS.loc.x, oVS.size.x, nVS.loc.x, nVS.size.x);
	  dy = setOff(oVS.loc.y, oVS.size.y, nVS.loc.y, nVS.size.y);
  }
  public void set(BBox from, VS to){
    setScale(from.h.size(), from.v.size(), to.size.x, to.size.y);
    dx = setOff(from.h.lo, from.h.size(), to.loc.x, to.size.x);
    dy = setOff(from.v.lo, from.v.size(), to.loc.y, to.size.y);
  }
```

I have included two versions of set, one that works from a BBox which we will probably need when normalizing Ink.BUFFER coordinates.

This was a long chapter because I know that some of my students have not done any math in a long time, so I took longer to explain how I think about the coordinate transform math. But of course when you boil it all down, there were really only two equations in the whole thing, the formula for doing the transform calculation (that shows up in tx, ty) and the calculation of the appropriate offset (setOff) when what you are given is one box that needs to move to another.
 
## Code Summary

### PL gets one new function:
```java
  public void transform(){for(int i = 0; i<points.length; i++){points[i].setT(points[i]);}}
```

## V gets functions & a static class Transform:
```java
  public static Transform T = new Transform();
  public void setT(V v){set(v.tx(), v.ty());} 
  public int tx(){return x*T.n/T.d + T.dx;}
  public int ty(){return y*T.n/T.d + T.dy;}
    
  public static class Transform{
    private int dx=0, dy=0, d=1, n=1; 
    public Transform(){}
  
    public void setScale(int oW, int oH, int nW, int nH){
      d = (oW>oH)?oW:oH; n = (nW>nH)?nW:nH;
    }
    public int setOff(int oX, int oW, int nX, int nW){return (-oX-oW/2)*n/d + nX + nW/2;}
  
    public void set(VS oVS, VS nVS){
      setScale(oVS.size.x, oVS.size.y, nVS.size.x, nVS.size.y);
      dx = setOff(oVS.loc.x, oVS.size.x, nVS.loc.x, nVS.size.x);
      dy = setOff(oVS.loc.y, oVS.size.y, nVS.loc.y, nVS.size.y);
    }
    public void set(BBox from, VS to){
      setScale(from.h.size(), from.v.size(), to.size.x, to.size.y);
      dx = setOff(from.h.lo, from.h.size(), to.loc.x, to.size.x);
      dy = setOff(from.v.lo, from.v.size(), to.loc.y, to.size.y);
    }
  }  
```

## Test it

Now, in order to test this, we will just temporarily modify our Ink constructor to transform and move the ink from where it actually happened on the screen to some other box.

```java
  public static G.VS TEMP = new G.VS(100,100,100,100); // for testing, a box that we will move ink to
  public Ink(){
    super(K); // we need to call super to create the PL that is this Ink.
    G.PL temp = BUFFER.subSample(K); // oops - our function doesn't fill an existing array so make a temp
    G.V.T.set(BUFFER.bbox, TEMP); // just to test transforms, we move from BBox coords to TEMP coords
    temp.transform(); // actually transform temp before we move into the ink object
    for(int i = 0; i<K; i++){this.points[i].set(temp.points[i]);} // .. and copy the temp to our destination
  }
```

Try it out. Seems to work.

## Clean up

Technically, we have tested the code that went from a bounding box to our VS TEMP. We will next verify that we can in fact go the other direction (and simultaneously verify that our code to construct a VS from BBox works as well) by doing this in our ink constructor. We will leave the code that we have in place, which is converting from the BBox to some standardized coordinates (100,100,100,100) and then we will just compute the Transform that move it from the TEMP coordiante system back out to the VS that corresponds to the BBox that we started with. That should put the ink right back where it came from (though reduced in sample size).

```java
    G.V.T.set(BUFFER.bbox, TEMP); // just to test transforms
    temp.transform();
    G.V.T.set(TEMP, BUFFER.bbox.getNewVS()); // see if we can put the ink back where it came from
    temp.transform();
```

Seems to work fine on my box.

We should in theory remove all that extra work from our Ink constructor, first normalizing and then immediately expanding it back out to where it was seems like wasted work. However there is a good possibility that before we are done we will ultimately want to actually keep Ink in Normalized coordinates with a VS so that we can move it back to where it came from rather than keep it in its raw form. Keeping it in normalized form allows us to do some compression - draw a letter 'a' on the screen - look at the count of the points it took to draw that raw image and remember that when we subsampled it down to 25 you saved space for every point that we are NOT keeping.

But before we get to that, now that we have subsampling and transforms we have all the tools that we need for Norms i.e. normalized coordinates.

[next: Norms](MJ0405.md)