## MidJava 4-8 Recognition Subsystem [&LT;](MJ0407.md) [&GT;](MJ0409.md)
  
# ShapeTrainer
## Day 7

Now that we have Shapes and Ptototypes and are able to match and blend them, we have tested building a single prototype list and looking throught that to find the best match BUT we have not yet tested our ability to go though a list of Shapes and find the Shape that best matches some input. Finding that matching Shape is of course exactly what our Nearest Neighbor shape recognition is supposed to do and we are essentially at the point where our code can do that, BUT in order to test it we will need to have some Shape data, several different prototypes of several different shapes for us to search through and do our matching.

In order to create that data we will build an app called ShapeTrainer that will allow us to give names to shapes and draw examples of those particular shapes to store as prototypes. We were going to need this application anyway. We need it for testing now, but we needed it to construct the actual data for the recognizer that we want to use in our application so let us just build it now.

In some sense, the ShapeTrainer will not be terribly different from what we are currently doing in our PaintInk app. In that app right now, we take all input, compare it to a single prototype list, blend it or add it as necessary. This is exactly what we want to do to train any single shape. All we will need to do to make it more robust is to allow us to type in a Shape name, and to have the system either create or find that Shape in the Shape.DB (A static map of all the shapes that we can recognize) and use that Shape's prototype list for additions and blending.

## DOT

There is also one little gotcha that we must deal with eventually in shape recognition and I mention it now. There is ONE shape, the DOT, that does NOT use the general shape matching metric of comparing norms to prototype lists. DOTs are by definition a mouse dn, mouse up in quick succession. There was no collection of points. The BoundingBox was tiny. You do NOT want to blow that up to some normalized coordinate system and match coordinates - it would all be noise. So we special case the DOT shape. The recognizer should first look at the bounding box, and if it is TINY, below some UC.dotThreshold in both X and Y, then it declares it to be a DOT and never even looks at the norm.

This means that recognition is NOT based on Norms, it is actually based on Ink. We need the box (the VS) where the Ink occured so that we can quickly look at the size and first determine if it was a dot BEFORE we look at the norms.

I mention this now because when we build the ShapeTrainer there is one shape that we do NOT train prototypes for, namely DOT.

If the user, who is allowed to type in the name of a shape to train, happens to type in "DOT" we should notice that and refuse to train it.

This is not a bad thing. In fact when you get right down to it, there is a second shape name that we don't want to train. It would be BAD to train a shape named "", the empty string. We also probably want to block having spaces in names. And this actually leads us into a notion for how we will build the ShapeTrainer User Interface. We will be keeping a string that is the name of the shape that the user wants to train. We can look at that name and give the user feedback on that particular name. I see three possibilities: The shape name is KNOWN, i.e. we already have some prototypes for that shape, it is in the database - the shape name is UNKNOWN, i.e. we do NOT have that shape in the database yet but it is perfectly legal - and thrid, the shape name is ILLEGAL, we will NOT actually create or train that shape.

## Saving

We will eventually want to actually save all this data out to a file. We are NOT going to do that first pass BUT we will want to leave space in our layout for a button that will allow us to save someday.

## Selection Buttons

We will eventually want to allow the user to click through the list of all the different shapes and look at the prototypes that are stored for each one. We will not do this on the first pass either, but once again we will leave space for it and it should be clear that we will need to deal with some kind of button behavior eventually. We will deal with that in a later section as well.

## User Prompt

We will need a place on the screen where we will prompt the user, telling them WHAT shape is currently being trained and also giving them some feedback on that name, namely whether the name is KNOWN, UNKNOWN or ILLEGAL.

## Prototype Deletion Buttons

It would be SO COOL if you could remove prototypes from the list that you think are bad. Since our PaintInk app currenly draws all the existing prototypes out to the screen, we could just let the user click on any one those prototypes they didn't want in the list and make that the UI action that would delete that Prototype from the list.

Yeah, great idea. Let's leave that for version 2. Maybe we can assign that project to an Intern. 

What? Why not just do it now?

Sigh, because none of the showboxes that we used for drawing out those prototypes were saved anywhere, they don't actually exist eacept as an artifact of showing a Prototype.List. We would have to create those boxes, save them somewhere, make them into Areas, put them on an area list, locate the active area, react to them as buttons which we haven't even built yet and we want to SHIP this code by the end of today.

Great Idea though, we will do this FOR SURE, just not right away. For right now we will use the poor man's method of deleting bad prototypes which is - IF you enter a bad prototype then DON'T press the save button. Just shut down the app, lose everything that you have done so far, including the bad prototype, and start over.

(grumble, grumble) That doesn't sound very nice. Delete buttons would be better.

Yes, absolutely. You are right. Version 2. Now, go write the keyboard routines the we NEED and quit whining!


## Keyboard input

Finally, something that we MUST do on our first pass. We must let the user tell us which shape they want to train. We will let them type characters and each one will get appended to the growing currentName String - unless they type a space or return, in which case we will nuke the current name. So they can type "S-E" train a few of those then type, " N-N" (and the space at the front will clear out the old name) and then they train some N-N shapes.

We have NOT done any keyboard input previously so that is the FIRST step in building our ShapeTrainer - create a new App, make sure you call it from main and add the logic to READ keyboard events, either appending characters to a current String or nuking the current string when necessary. And noticing the State of the current string, in particular noticing whether or not the string is one of the few ILLEGAL ones. What I am pushing for here is the shortest easiest class that we can write that will do SOMETHING showing that we can indeed read the keyboard.

### in reaction package add:
```java
  public class ShapeTrainer extends Window{
    public ShapeTrainer(){super("Shape Trainer", UC.mainWindowWidth, UC.mainWindowHeight);}
    
    public static String UNKNOWN = " <- this name is currently Unknown.";
    public static String ILLEGAL = " <-this name is NOT a legal Shape name.";
    public static String KNOWN   = " <-this is a known shape.";
  
    public static String curName = "";  
    public static String curState = ILLEGAL;
    
    public void setState(){ // more work needed to actually detect KNOWN
      curState = (curName.equals("") || curName.equals("DOT")) ? ILLEGAL : UNKNOWN;
    }
    public void paintComponent(Graphics g){
      G.fillBackground(g, Color.WHITE);
      g.setColor(Color.BLACK);
      g.drawString(curName, 600,30);
      g.drawString(curState, 700,30);
    }
    public void keyTyped(KeyEvent e) {
      char c = e.getKeyChar(); System.out.println("Typed: " + c);
      curName = (c == ' ' || c == 0x0D || c == 0x0A)? "": curName + c; // x0D & x0A are ascii CR & LF
      setState();      
      repaint();
    }
  }
```

As you can see, we override keyTyped and call getKeyChar on the KeyEvent to see the char that was typed. Because this is your first time, in this class, with key events I will toss out some general comments.

The difference between keyPressed, keyTyped, and keyReleased is that your system may want to react to the exact moment that a key was pressed. For example, when the used presses and releases the shift key NO character was actually typed. However your user interface MIGHT have wanted to react immediately to the user pressing the shift key by painting an entirely different keyboard presentation on the screen to show them what keyEvent they would get if they hit some other key while they had the Shift key depressed. 

Another thing that you will have to look up someday (if you need it) is what sort of events are caused when the user presses the arrow keys (or backspace). There is no need to learn that until you need it and it is easy to look up.

Now that we can read keyboard events we will move on to the changes that we need in Shape to hold the Shape.DB

[next: Shape Database](MJ0409.md)