## MidJava 4-3 Recognition Subsystem [&LT;](MJ0402.md) [&GT;](MJ0404.md)
# Subsampling

When you draw a single stroke on the screen, like for example a character V how many points do you actually draw? You probably don't know and neither do I. Lets modify PaintInk and test it. Add this line to paintComponent:

```java
  g.drawString("points: "+Ink.BUFFER.n, 600,30);
```
Now draw some lines and see what you get.

On my machine. A short quick horizontal line was on the order of 15 points. A V shape, not particularly big was about 40 points. A Slowly drawn V shape that filled the screen takes nearly 400 points. When we get to the point that we want to recognize that large screen filling V as being the same shape as the little small V we will need to deal with 3 things. We don't care where on the screen we drew it, we don't care what size we drew it, and we don't care how many points we actually captured from the mouse. If the user draws slowly, they get lots of mouseMove events, if they draw rapidly the get fewer mouse move events. Basically for our recognition we want Translation, Scale and SampleSize invarience. We are going to deal with the last of those first.

Subsampling is the trick of taking some variable number of data points and either throwing some of them out or inserting some new ones in order to get the number of data points to be a single exact number like 20. There are fancy ways of doing that, where you interpolate between existing points but we will do nothing fancy here. If we have too few we will replicate a few points, if we have too many we will just throw them out. 

Here, where we are drawing 2D graphic points on a screen over time, there are several basic ways that we COULD subsample, we could look at how far apart the datapoints are on the screen and try to pick ones that are a representative distance apart (this is called "Spatial Subsampling") OR we could just pick points that a equally spaced in time (like throwing out ever third point - called "Temporal Subsampling"). There is another method that looks for places of maximum curvature i.e. trying to find the most extreme turning points and I don't know if that method even has a standard name. The purpose of these different subsampling methods is simply to preserve as much information about what matters to you as possible.

The points that we collected from the mouse were already a sampling of all the points that COULD have been between the beginning and the ending of your stroke. They are NOT being sampled in time because we do NOT have a timer firing off every second giving us another mouse point. When the mouse does NOT move we get NO points. Once the mouse IS moving we are pretty much sampling in time, because it takes a certain amount of time for the system to read in one mouse value and be ready for the next one. So the mouse is closer to time sampled than it is to spatialy sampled. On the other hand, if the user is drawing slowly, time does NOT matter, every time the mouse MOVES by one pixel, that would be enough to fire a mouse event and then you ARE sampling by space rather than by time.

Humm.. what is really going on with that mouse? What do those points actually look like? Time to modify PaintInk and see what is going on. (By the way, that is part of what I am actually showing in this lesson. When you want to know something about what is going on with your computer - YOU WRITE SOME CODE AND FIND OUT! You do NOT google and see what some fool THINKS is going on. OK - sure, google first, absolutely, but you are the fool if you don't write code and check if that dweeb on stack overflow knew what they was talking about.)

Modify the Ink draw routine. It was just drawing lines between the points, so we can't actually see the points. I still want to see those lines but now I want you to draw little circles on top of each point that was actually on the line. (Oops - we can't actually do that - Ink draw is just chaining down to PL and its drawing routine, so lets add another drawing routine called drawNDots to <span>G.PL</span> )

<!--Some Markdown fuck up misrenders G.PL without the span! -->
### in <span>G.PL</span>
```java
    public void drawNDots(Graphics g, int n){
      g.setColor(Color.GREEN);
      for(int i=0; i<n; i++){g.drawOval(points[i].x-2, points[i].y-2, 4,4);}
    }
```

Actually I don't like that code. I am tired of drawing ovals from the upper right corner when what I want is a circle of a given radius drawn about a center point. I am going to build a static helper function in G and then rewrite that draw code for PL

```java
  public static void drawCircle(Graphics g, int x, int y, int r){g.drawOval(x-r,y-r,r+r,r+r);}
  
  public void drawNDots(Graphics g, int n){
    g.setColor(Color.GREEN);
    for(int i=0; i<n; i++){drawCircle(g, points[i].x, points[i].y, 4);}
  }
```

And now temporarily I will modify the drawN routine to drawNDots in addition to drawing lines.

```java
  public void drawN(Graphics g, int n){
    for(int i = 1; i < n; i++) {
      g.drawLine(points[i - 1].x, points[i - 1].y, points[i].x, points[i].y);
    }
    drawNDots(g,n);
  }
```
    
Now when you draw, if you see nothing but green dots if you are drawing slowly. If you see black lines between green circles you are seeing time sampling, because you moved quite a ways before you got another mouse event. 
   
So what sampling method are we going to use? We will use yet another method called "Linear Sampling". This the the quick and dirty method. If we have twice as many points as we need, we just throw out every other one. If we have three times as many as we need we will keep every third point. Similarly in doubling them up, we will just replicate points as often as we need to get the number that we want.

So how do you do linear sampling? It is pretty easy, particularly when you are taking an array with N points and going to an array with K points (we are sub-sampling down to K from N). It looks like this:

```java
  for(int i = 0; i<K; i++){subSample[i] = sample[i*(N-1)/(K-1)]}
```

Why that formula? Well, first remember that the last element in the array of N is really at N-1, likewise the last one in the K array is at K-1. SO when the index i (which is marching from 0 to K-1 in the K array) finally gets all the way up to K-1 which is the last index in the sub-sample, we want to be using the last index from the sample. So when i is K-1 that multiplier changes it to N-1. It is also easy to see that when i is zero, you moved from slot 0 to slot 0. 

And finally the magic of linear functions: a line is defined by 2 points. This formula which is a single multiplier IS a linear function and it matched at the first point and it matched at the last point so it is THE linear function that maps any integer value between those two points.

Let us write a routine (in Ink.Buffer) that will return a subsampled PL from the n points in the ink buffer. 

### in Ink.Buffer
```java
  public G.PL subSample(int k){
    G.PL res = new G.PL(k);
    for(int i = 0; i<k; i++){res.points[i].set(this.points[i*(n-1)/(k-1)]);}
    return res;
  }
```

Note: the above code requires yet another change to G.V - we need a 'set' function that instead of taking in an x and a y, takes in a single V. And when we go write that function, it looks just like the constructor that we added to take in a V arguemet as well. If we had written this new set function FIRST, we could have used that in that second constructor so we will make some fixes to G.V

### in G.V
```java 
    public V(V v){this.set(v);} // copy existing V
    public void set(V v){x = v.x; y=v.y;}; 
```

And finally to see our subsampling in action, we will modify our Ink constructor so that instead of createing a PL that is ALL the points that were in Buffer, we will just sub-sample them.

```java
  public static final int K = 10;
  public Ink(){
    //super(BUFFER.n); // create PL big enough to hold the n points in BUFFER
    //for(int i = 0; i<BUFFER.n; i++){this.points[i] = new G.V(BUFFER.points[i]);}
    super(K); // we need to call super to create the PL that is this Ink.
    G.PL temp = BUFFER.subSample(K); // oops - our function doesn't fill and existing array so make a temp
    for(int i = 0; i<K; i++){this.points[i].set(temp.points[i]);} // .. and copy the temp to our destination 
  }
```
oops! had a bug in that. My sub-sampling code assumed that there were actually some points in the BUFFER. If BUFFER.n == 0 the sub-sampling code uses n-1 and generates an array index of -1. the subSample code should have had a guard in it.

### change subSample in Ink.Buffer
```java
  if(BUFFER.n>0){
    G.PL temp = BUFFER.subSample(K); // oops - our function doesn't fill and existing array so make a temp
    for(int i = 0; i<K; i++){this.points[i].set(temp.points[i]);} // .. and copy the temp to our destination 
  }
```
You know, that green color is to hard to look at. I am going to change the color of the circles to BLUE in G.PL.drawNDots. (I am not using a UC color for this because the dots are just debug code. We will throw it ALL out once we know that our code is doing what we want.)

Now this code is still drawing our BUFFER with all the dots, so when you finish your first stroke you will still see all the dots, but when you go to draw the second line you will see the first line sub-sampled.

If you draw a very long complicated shape you will see that the sub-sampling is throwing out so many points that the fidelity is lost. Another example where our version of sub-sampling will be bad can be seen by doing the following. Draw a V shape, but draw the first branch down to the tip very rapidly and stop, then draw the second branch very slowly. You are creating a V shape with very few points on the first branch and lots on the second branch and our recognition code will have trouble matching a shape like that to a more standard uniformly drawn V. We will NOT worry about these problems. Most drawing is done uniformly and the compass gestures are NOT long complicated strokes. 

What we are trying to do here is to figure out what would be a good sample size COMPROMISE that will work for our recognition of compass gestures (and possibly some simple english letter shapes like 'o' or 'a' - draw some a's and some o's and see how they look sub-sampled) I specifically wrote this code with the number 10 because in my opinion it is too small. Try a number like 25 and see the difference.

This is why we were printing out the number of points in our strokes and looking for the minimum. A short fast single line maybe gets away with about 10 points but if you turn a corner you will be taking 25 for sure and that is why 25 is about enough points to represent one of our simple V shapes. So we did all that work to create another value in UC.
```java
   public static final int normSampleSize = 25;
```

And of course go ahead and change Ink to use that new constant. With that change, you should be able to write some single stroke letters, a,e,u,m and still be able to recognize them in spite of the sub-sampling.

[next: Coordinate Transforms ](MJ0404.md)