## MidJava 4-9 Recognition Subsystem [&LT;](MJ0408.md) [&GT;](MJ0410.md)

# Shape Database

Conceptually this is a very simple thing. It is just the collection of all the Shapes that we are able to recognize. We could certainly keep this as a list of Shapes. I have said as much when I mentioned going back and forth through a list of Shapes in our ShapeTrainer, but we will also want that list to be kept in a Map organized by the name string. The reason is simple, when we write our Music Application and it wants to create a Reaction object that reaction will be tied to the shape name. we will be looking for a "S-S" stroke to draw that note stem, we will use a "E-W" shape to create a staff. The map is just a convenient way to get the appropriate shape (which is what our recognizer will be returning) associated with a given name.

Also there is lovely function in Map called "values" and to quote the Java Platform Docs
```text
  Returns a Collection view of the values contained in this map. 
  The collection is backed by the map, so changes to the map are reflected in the collection, and vice-versa.
```

So we will think of the Map as being the fundamental representation of all our shapes. 

You haven't seen Serialization yet in this course. It is the way that we write information, in particular objects out to a file. So when I mentioned saving our shape database, in the back of my head I know that I want to have an object, preferably one single object, that holds all the information that I want to Serialize. That shape Map will be the object that we will read and write to a file. Here is the outline of what I am thinking of adding to the Shape class:

### in Shape add:
```java
  public static HashMap<String, Shape> DB = loadShapeDB();
  public static Shape DOT = DB.get("DOT");
  public static Collection<Shape> LIST = DB.values();  // this collection backed by DB, so changes to DB show up here  
  public static HashMap<String, Shape> loadShapeDB(){
    HashMap<String, Shape> res =  new HashMap<>();
    res.put("DOT", new Shape("DOT")); // make sure that DOT is one of the shapes in the DB 
    return res;    
  }
  public static void saveShapeDB(){}
  public static Shape recognize(Ink ink){...}
 ```

I have essentially stubbed loadShapeDB. It does no loading what so ever, instead it just creates an empty Map from scratch which is adequate for testing our ShapeTrainer. Similarly, saveShapeDB is just a stub, doing nothing until we get around to the problem of actually reading and writing files. We could have stubbed recognize as well since we don't need if for the trainer but on the other hand it is pretty straight forward:

```java
  public static Shape recognize(Ink ink){ // note: can return null
    if(ink.vs.size.x < UC.dotThreshold && ink.vs.size.y < UC.dotThreshold){return DOT;}
    Shape bestMatch = null; int bestSoFar = UC.noMatchDist; // assume no match
    for(Shape s:LIST){
      int d = s.prototypes.bestDist(ink.norm); 
      if(d < bestSoFar){bestMatch = s; bestSoFar = d;}
    }
    return bestMatch;      
  }
```

We will need a UC.dotThreshold. I used the number 5. If the mouse moves less than 5 pixels it is a dot.
    
Look at all that scary code that we have written none of which is tested yet. We were adding this stuff to Shape so that we HAD a shape Database so that we COULD add new shapes into it from our trainer. So let us get back to writing the ShapeTrainer.

[next: Constructing Shapes](MJ0410.md)