## MidJava 5-3 Reactions [&LT;](MJ0502.md) [&GT;](MJ0504.md)

# Mass.java
```java
  public Layer layer;
  public Mass(String layerName){
    this.layer = Layer.byName.get(layerName);
    if(layer!=null){layer.add(this);} else {System.out.println("BAD LAYER NAME-" + layerName);}
  }
  public void delete(){
    clearAll(); // clears all reactions from this list AND from the Reaction byShape Map
    layer.remove(this); // remove self from layers.
  }
  public void show(Graphics g){} 
```

Mass is pretty simple. Most of the work will be done in subclasses that actually implement the show routine and that add all the Reactions that this mass will need. 

I DID implement show right here in abstract Mass. As you can see, it does NOTHING. This means that I can have Masses that have reactions but show nothing on the screen. I could have left this out which would FORCE you to put a null show routine in a Mass that shows nothing. This way you get nothing for free! :) Usually you will override show.

## Addendum
There is a bug in the Java System (or perhaps just in my understanding of Java) that will eventually crop up and which I will explain in detail in Chapter 7 "Music Notes" in the section on "Un-Beaming". That is where the problem showed up the first several times that I taught this course. 

In a later version of the course the bug showed up earlier, which concerns me. I am going to fix the bug NOW here in the Mass class without explaining why. The explanation will come much further down the road, when I will start complaining about the bug (which you will NOT see) because we have already fixed it here. 

I generally prefer to walk you into bugs and then fix them when they trip you up, because that is what real programming is all about. However in this case, because it is just possible that this bug will trip you up before you ever get to the section on Un-Beaming, we will fix it now. 

I don't want you to be unable to make any further progress in this book because the system keeps crashing. So please add the following override for equals into the mass class.

### add to Mass class
```java
  public boolean equals(Object o){return this == o;}
```

This should keep your system stable all the way up to and even through the section on Un-Beaming where I will suddenly go into a rant about this hidious bug which you will never see because you already fixed it way back here.
  
[next: Layer.java](MJ0504.md)