## MidJava 5-7 Reactions [&LT;](MJ0506.md) [&GT;](MJ0508.md)
# Undo
## Day 9
Undo in a traditional app feature that was typically complicated when written on an old slow machine with small memory. The problem was that you might need to keep a lot of infomration around (like all the text that you deleted) in order to undo that delete. Also, it meant in some sense, that you had twice as much code to write. You first wrote the code to DO some thing and then you needed a different set of code to UNDO things.

We are going to do something much easier. Conceptually we can keep a list of everything that you DO as you do it. IF you can rapidly run that list from the beginning and do everything that you just did, exactly as you did it before, as long as there is no randomness in it, you can get back to any previous state. In particular, the way that you undo your last step is that you just remove the last element from the list, reinitialize your system to the way it was when you first started, and then you run the list and do everything that you did except for that last step which you removed.

We are further aided in our gesture based application (which conveniently does NOT do anything using swing components like buttons and menus and dialogs) because every single ACTION that we take was essentially the result of an reaction responding to a gesture. If we just remember the list of all the gestures that have been done, we can fairly easily alter that list and re-run all those gestures.

This style of Undo DOES have design consequences, and we will just live with them because they are not too bad and because by living with these consequences we get an ESSENTIAL feature, UNDO, working fairly easily.

One of those consequences is the one that I just mentioned, we are choosing to trigger all actions with gestures and thus to NOT use standard swing components. This doesn't mean that we could NEVER use menus and buttons, just that we would have to implement some way of undoing those actions WHICH is exactly no different from what we would have had to do if we had used them in the first place! Another consequence is that we will be FORCED to keep our drawing routines CLEAN - NO SIDE EFFECTS! 

Basically at this point we are introducing TWO paths through the code:
 
  1) where the user is drawing gestures and the screen is reacting and repainting after each one. This code is usually what the programmer tests to see that their code works as expected and
  
  2) a second path when you are running a list,redoing one action immediately after another with no time to repaint inbetween. If those two paths don't do EXACTLY the same thing you won't get the undo behavior that you expect.

None of these consequences of Undo is BAD or even unexpected. Any application that had Undo in it is just more complicated than one that does NOT have Undo built into it. 

Now Let's look at the design for that Undo system. All of this goes into the Gesture class.

We will want to add a List class to Gesture so that we can keep a list of Strokes. That will work as our undo list. 

### nest in Gesture
```java
  public static class List extends ArrayList<Gesture>{}
```

We want a static UNDO list in the Gesture class which we will make private.
### add to Gesture
```java
  private static List UNDO = new List();
```

We will need to modify the up function of the Gesture.AREA - Once we know that we got a reaction to a gesture then we know that we want to add it to the UNDO list. However, we will also need to have a block of code that does exactly the same thing WITHOUT adding it to the UNDO list for those times when we are actually REDOING the UNDO list. SO we will add two static functions to Gesture, one for just doing the gesture without adding to UNDO and the other that WILL add to UNDO if appropriate.
```java
  private void doGesture(){ // just do it! - don't put on UNDO, it's probably already there!
    Reaction r = Reaction.best(this);
    if(r != null){ r.act(this);}
  }
  private void undoableGesture(){ // IF the gesture causes a reaction, then add to undo list and do it.
    Reaction r = Reaction.best(this);
    if(r != null){ UNDO.add(this); r.act(this);}
  }
```

Next we build the actual undo function:
```java  
  public static void undo(){
    if(UNDO.size() > 0){
      UNDO.remove(UNDO.size()-1); // remove last element
      Layer.nuke();  // eliminates all the masses
      Reaction.nuke();  // clears byShape then reloads initial reactions
      UNDO.redo();
    }
  }
```

I have guarded UNDO. It does nothing if the UNDO list is empty. If it was non-empty then I can safely remove the last one and finish undoing. As you can see, I have written 3 expectations, i.e. functions that I have not yet written in my other classes. I want a static function nuke() in the Layer class to clear out the layers. Since the layers are where the Masses live, nuking the layers should wipe out all the masses. It is a one liner. 

```java  
  public static void nuke(){ // NUKE all layers in preperation for undo.
    for(I.Show lay : ALL){((Layer)lay).clear();}   // ALL remains intact, but the layers and thus the masses are cleared
  }
```

I also need a redo() function in my Gesture.List class that simply goes through an entire list and calls doGesture on each gesture. This is also a one liner:

```java  
    private void redo(){ for(Gesture g : this){g.doGesture();}}
```

And finally I need to hack up the Reaction class so that it removes the reactions from the byShape Map. This would have been a one liner, where I just deleate the byShape Map and create a new empty one - BUT - When I actaully start redoing gestures I don't want the map to be empty, I want it loaded up with the initialReactions that the application needs to interpret those first few user gestures. So I need to load those reactions into the map before I return from nuking the byShape map. 

Thinking just a bit ahead, I MIGHT want the application someday to have the option of disabling one of those initialReactions - I mean, it is possible that after you have loaded some masses into the system, those very first initialReactions will get in the way of further processing. On the other hand, I don't want to remove those initial reactions from the initialReactions List because they will be needed absolutely anytime the user does an UNDO. 

So we do need to be sure that we can re-enable all the reactions in the initialReaction list before launch the redo of the undo list. This persuades us to add an enable function into the Reaction.List class.

```java  
    public void enable(){for(Reaction r : this){r.enable();}} // enables entire list
```

And finally, with that function, I can now nuke the Reactions properly:

```java  
  public static void nuke(){ // used to reset for UNDO
    byShape = new Map(); // throw away all the reactions.
    initialReactions.enable(); // enable insures that the reaction is in the byShape Map
  }
```

Now that we have an undo function that we can call, we will wire up the Gesture.Area up function to LOOK specifically for the "N-N" undo gesture (And yes, I am going to hard-wire that one single shape for that one single function. Any reaction that is looking for a N-N shape will never see it!)

```java  
  public void up(int x, int y){
    Ink.BUFFER.add(x,y);
    Ink ink = new Ink();
    Gesture g = Gesture.getNew(ink); // this can fail - g can be null if unrecognized
    Ink.BUFFER.clear();
    if(g != null){
      if(g.shape.name.equals("N-N")){ // hardwired UNDO
        undo();
      }else {
        g.undoableGesture();
      }
    }
  }
```

I believe that that is sufficient to get undo working. Tricky to think through, but an amazingly small amount of additional code. You can test this immediately with Simple Reaction and see that we have implemented Undo.

You will also see that I VIOLATED one of the requirements for Undo that I told you about. That was on purpose - I wanted to remind you that one of the requiremens for UNDO is that running the same list of strokes give you the same outcome every time which means that you CAN'T have random results. Our SimpleReaction app is FULL of random colors. When you undo anything, adding a box, deleting a box, changing the color on a box - ALL the colors change because you are redoing a list that was full of randomization.

## What works - what doesn't

And now that Undo is working we have reached another mile-stone in our project. At this point the reaction architecture is mostly in place. There are several other features that we could/should put into the reaction package. Our Area system has an interface but it is a total kludge - we have one Area for Ink and another one for Gestures and no systematic way of generating lists of Areas and selecting between them. And it is the lack of that systematic way of dealing with areas that means that we can't yet create draggable handles. Handles are like scroll bars that allow you to drag them and change the size or location, or color of something - handles should NOT leave INK all all over the screen while you drage them!

Another feature that we will eventually want in our gesture interface is the notion of a one-time offer (OTO). A one-time offer is a convenient UI device where the system notices that you have done something and it thinks that you MIGHTt want to do something else immediately after - so it gives you a one-time offer. 

OLD BOGUS UI systems like Windows and Apples do this all the time, popping a dialog up onto the screen that you must DISMISS if you don't want what it offers. What a WASTE of the User's precious time, makeing them click to get rid of the trash that showed up UNASKED for on the screen. 

Instead this WAY COOLER UI feature (which you SHOULD patent right now!) is that the offer pops up, and if the user does ANYTHING other than click on the offer to accept it, then the offer goes away. IF you want it, there it is, but if you don't, just ignore it, continue with your work and it will go away.

However, I do NOT want us to get bogged down writing NOTHING but tools, tools, and more tools for the reaction framework. We got us a shovel and a hammer - time to stop building tools and start building us a music application. WHEN we get to the point that we need 'handles' or OTOs we can come back to the framework and wedge them into the architecture.

Next up: A list of the classes that compose the bulk of the reaction architecture.  

[next: Reaction Code Collected](MJ0508.md)