## MidJava 5-1 Reactions [&LT;](MJ0413.md) [&GT;](MJ0502.md)

# Outline
## Vocabulary

Before we start building the next set of classes it would be good to review how the architecture works. Create these 4 classes in your reaction package.

## Gesture

Gestures keep track of WHAT was done on the screen and WHERE it was done. This sounds like what we are already doing in Ink, but it is just a tiny bit different from Ink. Ink is a Norm plus a VS box showing where it was on the screen. After we have done our recognition and know what Shape the Norm represented, we can throw out the Norm and just keep the Shape. Thus a Gesture, is a Shape and a VS box. 

The Ink is essentially a memory of 25 of the points that made up the mouse event and the box. The ink still "remembers" which direction it was drawn in. For example consider a circle gesture, an "O". The Ink knows whether it was drawn counterclockwise or clockwise, whereas the Shape is just "O". Thus a Gesture is in some sense more abstract than Ink.

A Gesture object is also conceptually much smaller than Ink.  I do have to say "conceptually" smaller, because in fact a Shape object lugs around a list of all the norms which are prototypes that are used to recognize that Shape - so in fact a single Shape object could be much larger than a single Norm. None the less, by the time you have drawn 30, E-E, strokes at different places on the screen, the Ink associated with those would be 30 different Norms, but the 30 Gestures are just 30 copies of a single pointer to that potentially large Shape object named "E-E". Basically, after we have recognized the ink we can throw the ink out and just remember the Gesture.

### create a Gesture class
```java
  public class Gesture{
    public Shape shape;
    public G.VS vs;
  }
```

## Layer
We will need a class Layer, which is used to do the z-ordering when we draw things to the screen. All graphics programs must draw things on the screen from background to foregound and Layer is the helper class that keeps  a list of all the visible items that are all the same distance from the background. So our output will consist of drawing all the layers in the proper layer order. Anything that wants to get onto the screen needs to be in one of those Layers.

A single layer is just a list of objects that can show themselves. Furthermore , since a layer is nothing but showable objects, we can declare that the layer itself implements I.Show and can write the show routine as the loop that showes everything in the Layer.

We will eventually emblish this class to have a single static Layer that will consist of ALL the other layers, which will allow us to just show all the layers in order.

### create a Layer class
```java
  public class Layer extends ArrayList<I.Show> implements I.Show{
    public String name;
    public Layer(String name){this.name = name;}
    public void show(Graphics g){for(I.Show item:this){item.show(g);}}
  }
```  

## Reaction

We will need some more interfaces that define the actual functions that make up a reaction

### create I.React
```java
  public interface Act{public void act(Gesture g);} // what you do if you react to some gesture
  public interface React extends Act{public int bid(Gesture g);} // how badly you want to so something
```

There will be many different types of Reactions in the system, but there are some things that they all have in common so we will need a Reaction class that will do that bookkeeping and be the base class which all reactions will extend. So our Reaction class will be abstract - it will NOT actually implement I.React - it's children must do that so we declare the base class to be abstract and declare that it implements I.React, which is the contract that all its children must obey. 

The bookkeeping that will be kept directly in the Reaction class consists mostly of the maintainence of lists of reactions, being sure that they are being properly added or removed from the marketplace.  

### Create the Reaction class
```java
  public abstract class Reaction implements I.React{
    public Shape shape;
  }
```

What the reaction class does NOT do is actually implement the two function, bid and act, that characterize a reaction. Only subclasses of Reaction will actually have bid and act routines. Reactions will actually typically live in exactly two places:

  1) a Reaction list that is owned by a Mass. So a single object like a noteHead will have a list of all the reactions for that one note head. Those reactions are kept in a list so that if we delete that noteHead all its reactions can go away. 
  
  2) each reaction also lives in the marketplace which is essentially a Map<Shape, Reaction.List>. Unlike the Mass lists, which are all the reactions associated with a single Mass, the marketplace will keep the reactions on list that are associated with a single shape like "S-S". That way, when the recognizer sees a "S-S" shape, it can go to that one list and only fire the reactions that were looking for "S-S". 

Since Reactions live in 2 places, if you ever delete one, you must go find it in the two different lists that it lives on and delete it from both places. This is the sort of bookkeeping that is done in the abstract reaction class.

Furthermore, there will be times when we want to keep a mass in existance and leave a reaction in its list, but want to be able to **disable** the reaction from working. This can be acomplished by removing it from the byShape list so that the marketplace never sees it. So we will used the vocabulary "enable" and "disable" to refer to whether or not the reaction is in that second place, the byShape Map.

## Mass

A Mass is the type of object that lives in a layer, as a result a Mass must implement I.Show so that it can show itslef. That is the output side of a Mass. A Mass also has an input side - it will maintain a list of reactions that are looking for gestures that happened close to where the Mass is located on the screen. So the class Mass itself is abstract - it is the ancestor of all the different types of object that look different and that can react in different ways to different gestures. Mass holds that stuff that is common to all those types of objects, in particular the maintainence of those lists. Think about it, when you delete a mass, since all masses live in a layer somewere, it must remove itself from the appropriate layer, and then it must delete every reaction on its list and untangle them from the "marketplace" where all the bidding on reactions takes place. So Mass is the class that does the bookkeeping for the layers and the reactions.

### create the Mass class
```java
  public abstract class Mass extends Reaction.List implements I.Show{
    public Layer layer;
  }
```

[next: Reaction.java](MJ0502.md)
