## MidJava 5-6 Reactions [&LT;](MJ0505.md) [&GT;](MJ0507.md)
# Simple Reaction Test  

Let us build yet another application, this one will let us test build some simple reactions using the code we have so far, and will also, eventually, let us test things that are comming up soon like Undo.

Create yet another Window class, name it ReactionTest and hook your main routine to run this ReactionTest.
```java
  public class ReactionTest extends Window{
    static{new Layer("BACK"); new Layer("FORE");} // create the layers that this class will need.
    
    public ReactionTest(){
      super("Simple Reaction Test", UC.mainWindowWidth, UC.mainWindowHeight);
      Reaction.initialReactions.addReaction(new Reaction("SW-SW"){
        public int bid(Stroke s){return 0;}
        public void act(Stroke s){new Box(s.vs);}
      });
    }
    public void paintComponent(Graphics g){
      G.fillBackground(g, Color.WHITE);
      g.setColor(Color.BLUE);
      Ink.BUFFER.show(g);
      Layer.ALL.show(g);
    }
    public void mousePressed(MouseEvent me){Gesture.AREA.dn(me.getX(),me.getY()); repaint();}
    public void mouseDragged(MouseEvent me){Gesture.AREA.drag(me.getX(),me.getY()); repaint();}
    public void mouseReleased(MouseEvent me){Gesture.AREA.up(me.getX(),me.getY()); repaint();}
    
    public static class Box extends Mass{
      public G.VS vs;
      public Color c = G.rndColor();
      public Box(G.VS vs){
        super("BACK"); this.vs = vs;
      }
      public void show(Graphics g){vs.fill(g,c);}
    }
  }
```

You should be able to read the above code with a little guidance. In the constructor, SimpleReaction, you will notice that I added one single reaction to the static initialReactions list over in the Reaction class. 

That new Reaction looks for a "SW-SW" shape AND the braces that immediately followed the closing paren of the argument list means that I am once again creating an anonymous class. Remember, the class Reaction is abstract. It is missing the bid and the act function, so I CAN'T create a new Reaction object without supplying the two functions that it needs. 

Technically the anonymous class is creating a subclass of Reaction, a class with no name BUT with the two required function that I immediately defined. I set the bid to 0 which is a perfect winning bid. This reaction will always win. And the act routine just creates a Box object that is the same size as the original ink for the SW-SW gesture.

The Mouse functions, the pressed, dragged, and released functions are essentially what I mentioned in the previous chapter, the Gesture class has a single static AREA that collects the ink, recognizes the shape, looks that shape up in the byShape Map to get a list of reactions and lets them bid. If there is a winner, the winner gets to act.

The Box class at the end of the app is just a simple thing that extends Mass. As a result it lives in the Layers. I implement a show routine, as is required by all Mass objects, that simply draws the colored rectangle.

When you run this, you should be able to do SW-SW gestures on the screen and each one should draw a different sized and colored box.

## Deleting the Boxes

The ReactionTest class, at the moment has ONE single initial reaction. That reaction can create many boxes. Now we want to show how to add individual reactions that are targeted at specific masses that show up on the screen. In particular we will add a delete reaction for the boxes. Bacically change the Box constructor to this:
```java

  public Box(G.VS vs){
    super("BACK"); this.vs = vs;
    
    addReaction(new Reaction("S-S"){
      public int bid(Gesture g){
        int x = g.vs.xM(), y = g.vs.yL(); // get the x,y from the Gesture
        if(Box.this.vs.hit(x,y)){return Math.abs(x-Box.this.vs.xM());} else {return UC.noBid;}
      }
      public void act(Gesture g){Box.this.delete();}
    });  
  }
```

We have added one single function call (that sprawls across 6 lines!) to add a reaction to this Box. The reaction that we add is a new one and we use the same anonymous class trick that we used before. The reaction wants a S-S gesture. However in this reaction you will see something that you probably have not seen before - that anonymous class that we created is NOT a static nested class, it is an INNER CLASS. It was created in an object context inside the constructor for a specific Box and as a result the Reaction object (which has no name) has a "compound this" buried in it.

Look at the act function for this reaction. If I just use the word, 'this', in the function, it is refering to the Reaction object, in exactly the way that you are accustomed to seeing the word **this**. However, I can instead use the 'compound this' by writing 'Box.this'. When I use that form of **this**, I am not looking at variables that are part of the Reaction object, instead I am following a pointer to the Box that was being created when this Reaction was being created. So "Box.this" is one specific box, "Box.this.vs" would be the vs associated with that one specific Box, "Box.this.c" would be the color of that box.

What this means is that the code inside the bid and act routines of a reaction created this way CAN and SHOULD make reference to THE particular object that they are affecting. So, the act code is a simple example. It says, "Box.this.delete()" which means call the delete function on that particular box, which is of course what we wanted.

The bid routine IS more complicated but now that you know what **Box.this** means you should be able to decode it. I first create some local variables, x, y, which are the top mid point of the S-S stroke that made up the gesture. That point is essentially the 'hot spot' of the gesture, in this case the starting point. I want to reject any gesture where the hot spot did not HIT the specific box that the user is trying to delete, which is what the 'else clause' of the 'if' is for. If it did NOT hit, it returns noBid. All the boxes that weren't hit will be returning noBid and are thus not even in the contest. They will not win. BUT any box that was hit WILL bid and because boxes can be stacked one on top of another we need a distance function.

This is very typical of a bid routing. Usually there is some criteria where by you can completely rule out a gesture and return noBid, but if you can't rule it out, you want to return an integer that gets closer and closer to zero the better it is. The particular functional expression that I choose for this example was

```java
  Math.abs(x - Box.this.vs.midx());
```

So what is that expression? Well the x is the x that was the mid-x of that vertical S-S gesture and the Box.this.vs.midx() is the middle x coordinate of the box. I decided that the closer you draw the center of the gesture to the center of the box the better it was. I only used the x coordinate rather than both the x and the y to make a point. It shows how the Reaction architecture makes trade offs between different items winning the bids.

Draw a big box, and then a smaller box on top of the big box but off to one side. If you go do your S-S gesture near the center of the box that is on top, well that it the box that gets deleted. But if instead you start your gesture on the top box BUT you keep that gesture closer to the center of the bigger box than to the center of the smaller box you will see that you can delete a box from underneath that little one.

As another example of the same thing. Draw a small box. Now completly hide it with a big box. Now if you remember exactly where that little box is, you can delete it out from under the big box. You won't see it go away because of course, it is hidden, but you can see that you did. The delete gesture was on the big box and it did NOT go away. If you now delete the big box, sure enough the little one is no longer there.

I am not claiming that this particular bid function is optimal or even very good. I am just pointing out that the bid function is almost always an arithmetic function of the coordinate points of both the gesture and the screen object and that you almost always want a distance function so that there is a notion of more or less desirable. 

Consider the alternative. If the bid is just a constant nubmer, 17, then all the objects bid 17 and the first object on the list wins regardless of where the gesture was made on the screen.

So now that you have seen this. You ought go be able to add a second reaction to every Box. Make it so that a click on the box (a DOT gesture) changes the color to a new random color. You just need to add a second reaction into the Box constructor.

For the last test, change the name of one of the shape that you are looking for from one that you trained like S-S to one like BUG. Verify that you get the message that told you that the shapeDB did NOT know how to recognize that shape. So what actually happens in that case. Well, I create a reaction that is looking for a "BUG" shape and, it joined a Reaction.list waiting for that stroke and of course it will never happen.  
  
  [next: Undo](MJ0507.md)
