## MidJava 5-9 Reactions [&LT;](MJ0508.md) [&GT;](MJ0601.md)

# OTO Afterthoughts

## Day 10
OK - Sorry, I lied. OneTimeOffers. I can't resist. I just love designing tools and this one is just too easy to pass up. I'll compromise. We will just do the design thinking now, but we won't implement until we need it. Also, just for the record, One Time Offers are not some standard User Interface trick. As far as I know I am the inventor of this notion. I believe that the idea is patentable, or rather it was before I published it publicly here and put it in the public domain. I have about a dozen patents (all owned and paid for by the companies that I used to work for) so I do have some idea about what is and is not patentable. I didn't patent this particular notion because patents are expensive and are essentially worthless outside of the realm of corporate legal patent warfare. Since I no longer work for companies I no longer bother with patenting design notions, but I DO notice when something is patentable because that is part of the JOB of being a software developer for a corporation, helping them develop their Intellectual Property - software, patents, trademarks, rock videos etc.

Anyway, back to OneTimeOffers: Think about it. An OTO goes away immediately if you don't act on it. So, does it ever make sense to have two of them up on the screen at the same time? I suppose you could, like to let the person choose either A or B or C or ignore them all. But in some sense that is but a single offer. Our conclusion is that you just need one of these OTO objects.

Now since it has visible stuff up on the screen that can react to clicks it must be a Mass and live in the Layers. The real question is whether there is any need to be continually creating and destroying this OTO object and continually adding and removing it from the layers and the reaction lists.

The mere fact that something lives in the layers means that we call its show routine. That doesn't mean that if MUST actually draw something on the screen. It can maintain internal state, a boolean, of whether it is enabled or not and only draw itself if it is enabled. The same is true for the click reaction on the OTO. It can look at the sate and if it is NOT enabled it can just bid noBid for the DOT that it is looking for.

So one single OTO object living in the top layer could show and hide itself as needed. 

Clearly the app, when it needed to present an OTO to the user will need to tell the OTO what text should be displayed.

How will the OTO get notified that it has been declined (or accepted for that matter) and it should hide itself? Clearly, after we have collected a winning reaction, even if the winning reaction was the OTO's DOT function, we can disable the OTO.

A single line in the Gesture.Area up code, just before (or after we collect the winning reaction) can remove the OTO. That should work, eh?

WRONG - It almost works but as I said before and will no doubt say again, we have two paths through the code now, one when the user is entering strokes - that would go through the Gesture.Area code - and the other path is through the UNDO list. During UNDO playback you don't go through the Gesture.Area code. (Am I really so foresighted to see all these potential bugs before they happen? Sure, I try to do that all the time, but in reality, I've built this framework before and made every possible mistake. I now know the places where I had nasty bugs in the past and had to go fix my design.)

We need to disable the OTO on BOTH paths through the code so we must put it in two places, the doStroke, and the undoableStroke code.

At this point we BELIEVE that we know enough to write the OTO code. Of course there are other decisions to make about the OTO and that is why we don't write the code now. Does it put one single drawString text message up on the screen? Does it let the application install some arbitrarily complex drawing routine, with multiple hot spots that the user can click on? Do we do both - a quick and dirty single message sort of OTO and a more complicated one for the fancy applications? Do we blow off the fancy one for version 2 and only build the simple one first, or do we build the fancy one and then use it to implement a quick and dirty version and then just NOT TELL anyone that we can extend the functionality to something more complex in the future? Do we just throw the whole problem of designing a more complex OTO to the marketing folks as a bone and let them chew on it and argue amongst themselves as to what is the right thing to do?

Without going too far down this rabbit-hole in the design. I would point out that the multiple clicks and multiple messages is NOT really all that hard. We already know that we can create a bounding box for text that we draw on the screen. That is clearly the desired click region for each chunk of text. We can easily implement a list of located text elements (i.e. a string AND an X,Y location for it - the arguments to the drawString function). We can easily go through that list and draw all that text onto the screen. We can easily detect if ANY of them go clicked on, and if each text element has a behavior (probably some kind of I.Act object) associated with it. Basically we can build the fancy multi-choice OTO, a list of clickable text element, without a whole lot more work than building a single text OTO, (a list that just happens to be one element long).

Now, quite honestly, if we tell Marketing anything about multi-choice OTOs, and let them argue and discuss it, there is NO WAY that they are going to come back with a design that is this simple. It will be some baroque mess with extra fields and features (what if the app wants to post an icon instead of text - no, wait, wants to post a video, like an animated gif or something) because Marketing folks don't write code and don't know the difference between something that is an adequate few lines and something that is hundreds of man years of development effort. Far better to just build it, test it, and show it than to let some one who doesn't write code tell you how it "ought" to work.

And just to complete this section, THIS is what a design lead on a project does. They wave their hands at a notion, they sketch in broad terms the sort of thing that it should do, maybe even describe exactly where in the code base you need to go to hook something in, and then let some other programmer actually build the code and test it out.

So if you feel that you want to test your chops as a programmer, go build class Oto and wire it into the framework.

As I said, I will return to this later when I actually need it, BUT, I mentioned this design now because it does bring up an important point that you might find useful as we start to think about how to use the reaction architecture that we have just built to start creating a music notation application. The point being that the mere fact that a mass lives in the layers and thus has a show routine does NOT mean that it is alway visible and always reactive.

[next: Chapter 6 Music](MJ0601.md)