## MidJava 5-5 Reactions [&LT;](MJ0504.md) [&GT;](MJ0506.md)
# Gesture.java

```java
  public class Gesture{
    public Shape shape;
    public G.VS vs;
    
    private Gesture(Shape shape, G.VS vs){this.shape = shape; this.vs = vs;}
    
    public static Gesture getNew(Ink ink){ // can return null
      Shape s = Shape.recognize(ink);
      return (s==null) ? null : new Gesture(s,ink.vs);
    }
  }
```

For right now, Gesture is mostly just simple class with a factory method. However one thing that we will eventully want is a static AREA to give us the mouse behavior that we will want for gestures. We will want the name to be Gesture.AREA so we will add it to the Gesture class. 

What we need for that static object is something that implements that dn,drag, and up functions that are expected for an I.Area and we will do that by a method that we have not yet done in this class; we create  an anonymous class of type I.Area using new, and then we flesh out the missing functions to match the interface's signatures. 

You may have been told in a previous Java class that you CAN'T use new with an interface, or an abstract class because interfaces and abstract classes are NOT complete. They are missing code. 

Those incomplete items are indeed missing code BUT if you immediately supply the missing code in a block following your use of new, you are creating an object of an anonymous class. That object uses the code that you supplied in the block.

### add to Gesture
```java
  public static I.Area AREA = new I.Area(){
    public boolean hit(int x, int y){ return true; }
    public void dn(int x, int y){Ink.BUFFER.dn(x,y);}
    public void drag(int x, int y){Ink.BUFFER.drag(x,y);}
    public void up(int x, int y){
      Ink.BUFFER.add(x,y);
      Ink ink = new Ink();
      Gesture gest = Gesture.getNew(ink); // can fail if unrecognized
      Ink.BUFFER.clear();
      if(gest != null){
        Reaction r = Reaction.best(gest); // this can also fail - possibly no reaction wants it.
        if(r != null){r.act(gest);}
      }
    }
  };
 ```

 Note: do NOT be puzzled by the semi-colon immediately after the brace at the end of the above code. Normally braces are the ends of IF blocks or FOR blocks or the ends of definition of a function. This can lead you to beliving incorrectly that you NEVER need a semi-colon after a closing brace, because a closing brace is always the end of a statement. BUT notice that this multi-line block of code is actually a SINGLE STATEMENT. It started way up there when I was assigning an initial value to the variable AREA. It called new which needed a block to define functions for the anonymouse class and the semi-colon at the end is no different from the semi-colon that you needed on a statement like int foo = 3;

You can see that the dn and drag functions are just pass throughs to the area behavior of the Ink.BUFFER. The only complexity was in the up function, which constructs the ink, clears the BUFFER, attempts conversion to a gesture (which can fail for unrecognized strokes). Even if we DO create a valid gesture, the attempt to find a reaction that wins the bid can also fail (possibly none of the reactions liked the location of the gesture so refused to bid.) However, if we get through all the guards, the winning reaction will finally get to act on the gesture.

A typical Reaction based application will be able to use that gesture AREA like this:
```java
  public void mousePressed(MouseEvent me){Gesture.AREA.dn(me.getX(),me.getY()); repaint();}
  public void mouseDragged(MouseEvent me){Gesture.AREA.drag(me.getX(),me.getY()); repaint();}
  public void mouseReleased(MouseEvent me){Gesture.AREA.up(me.getX(),me.getY()); repaint();}
```

[next: Simple Reaction Test](MJ0506.md)