## MidJava 5-4 Reactions [&LT;](MJ0503.md) [&GT;](MJ0505.md)

# Layer

### Layer.java (with bug - read note)
```java
  package marlin.reactions;
  import marlin.I;
  import java.awt.*;
  import java.util.ArrayList;
  import java.util.HashMap;
    
  public class Layer extends ArrayList<I.Show> implements I.Show{
    public String name;
    
    public static Layer ALL = new Layer("ALL");
    public static HashMap<String, Layer> byName = new HashMap<>();
    
    public Layer(String name){
      this.name = name;
      if(!name.equals("ALL")){ALL.add(this);}
      byName.put(name, this);
    }
    public void show(Graphics g){for(I.Show item : this){item.show(g);}}
  }
```

Notice that while we said that layers are used to hold Mass objects, We do have one layer, ALL, that instead of holding Mass objects, it holds other Layers instead. This is perfectly OK, we DO want to be able to show things that do NOT have reactions associated with them. Just warning you that just because ALL Mass objects live in Layers it doesn't mean that everything living in a Layer must be a Mass even if MOST of them are.

NOTE: I have a bug in the above code. Sure I could have fixed it and pretended that I didn't make it but as an intermediate student you need to learn from MY mistakes :). The bug was this, I got a java initialization error caused by a null pointer during the static initialization phase. The problem is that my two static variables in this class, the Layer, ALL, and the Map, byName, are in the wrong order. WHAT? notice that the line createing ALL calls the constructor Layer and the constructor Layer writes into the byName map. That is the bug - the byName map did not yet exist when the constructor was called. By swapping the order of those two lines, the Map is created BEFORE you call the constructor to create the ALL layer. Sure, I could have reordered those two lines and said nothing and it all would have worked and you would never know that you can indeed get bugs in the initialization of your classes. It also happens when you start building mulit-class monster projects that you can get bugs caused because the classes are loading in a different order than you thought they did.

These initialization bugs can be tricky. The primary reason being that they happen while the system is initializing its classes which generally happens before you can do things like invoke the debugger or use System.out.println to fire off messages. There is a tendancy to think that initialization happens by magic automatically because for the most part it does BUT that static initialization is running code and that code can have bugs in it.

[next: Gesture.java](MJ0505.md)