## MidJava 6-6 Music [&LT;](MJ0605.md) [&GT;](MJ0701.md)
# Barlines

## Day 11
Barlines are a fairly simple class at least they start out simple. The reaction is to draw from the topline of a staff to the bottomline of that same staff. If you see that, you add in a barline object that will draw lines at that same x value through EVERY staff that participates in the same system.

Notice that the reaction location is based on a single Staff, but in some sense the barline belongs NOT to that staff but rather to the entire system that that Staff belongs to. And the fact is, by the time we are done, the way that we will actually draw that barline for the system is dependent on some information that is burried in the Staff.Fmt, but we will get to that later.

Barlines show up in several different formats and we will just use an int to know what type of barline this is. The formats are these

0. single - this is the normal shape - one single thin line.
2. double - this is two thin lines, used for indicating KeySig or TimeSig change
2. fine - this is a fat one with a thin one on the left - marks end of piece (fine - pronounced FeeNay - Italian meaning Finish or End)
2. repeat left - just like a fine, fat, thin on left but also dots on left
2. repeat right - fat line with thin on the right and dots on right
2. repeat double - fat line with thin and dots on both sides

So our actual drawing code will need to test this barType variable and have different drawing patterns. However, our first Bar code can just ignore it and draw a single line.

### create Bar class
```java
  //------------------BAR-------------------------------------
  public static class Bar extends Mass{
    private static final int FAT = 2, RIGHT = 4, LEFT = 8; // bits in barType
   /*  barType =
        0 - normal single thin line
        1 - double thin line (used for key change)
        2 - thin, Fat, i.e. Fine
        4-7 - Fat, thin, Dots - i.e. repeat Right
        8-11 - Dots, thin, fat - i.e. repeat Left
        12 - dots, thin, fat, thin, dots - i.e. repeat both sides
   */
    public Sys sys;
    public int x, barType = 0;
  
    public Bar(Sys sys, int x){
      super("BACK");
      this.sys = sys; this.x = x; barType = 0;
    }
  
    public void show(Graphics g){
      g.setColor(Color.RED);
      int y = sys.yTop(), N = sys.staffs.size();
      for(int i = 0; i < N; i++){
        Staff staff = sys.staffs.get(i);
        g.drawLine(x, staff.yTop(), x, staff.yBot());
      }
    }
  }
```

we will want a couple of coordinate helper function in Staff

### add to Staff
```java
  public int sysOff(){ return sys.page.sysfmt.staffOffset.get(iStaff); }
  public int yTop(){ return sys.yTop() + sysOff(); }
  public int yBot(){ return yTop() + fmt.height(); } 
```

In fact, while we are at it we will want the same thing over in the Sys class. Reactions are always comparing the locations of gestures to the locations of things on the screen so we need coordiante helpers in most visable objects so that we can easily write reactions.
  
### add to Sys
```java
  public int yBot(){return staffs.get(staffs.size()-1).yBot();}
```

That show routine should draw a bar across every staff, so let's write the reaction to create a Bar and test it. The Bar reaction belongs in Staff

### add to Staff constructor
```java
  addReaction(new Reaction("S-S"){
    public int bid(Gesture g){
      int x = g.vs.xM(), y1 = g.vs.yL(), y2 = g.vs.yH();
      G.LoHi m = Page.PAGE.xMargin;
      if(x < m.lo || x > m.hi){return UC.noBid;}
      int d = Math.abs(y1 - Staff.this.yTop()) + Math.abs(y2 - Staff.this.yBot());
      return (d < 30) ? d : UC.noBid; // If result isn't close enough then don't bother
    }
    public void act(Gesture g){
      new Bar(Staff.this.sys, g.vs.xM());
    }
  }); 
```

The reaction just looks for a S-S that starts at the topline of a single staff and runs to the bottom line of the single staff and lands within the margins.

Test it. 
 
## Multi-Threading Warning

In a previous build of this system I had an isolated glitch at this point, that reminded me that there is a bug lurking in this design that I ought to warn you about.

I am not going to attemtp to systematically fix it all through the code. (I would just assign that to an intern) The problem is this: When we are running Swing we are running multi-threaded code. ANYTIME you build something that is multi-threaded you run the risk of race conditions. Something in thread 1 normally happens before something in thread 2 and there is no problem, but occasionally, maybe once a year, thread 1 got delayed and thread 2 got to something BEFORE thread 1 got there and CATASTROPHE! - CRASH. These bugs are generally very hard to find because they work perfectly for so long that you think everything is OK but very rarely CRASH! It is NOT that fixing the bugs is hard, it is detecting that they even exist and replicating them when they almost NEVER happen.

So here is the bug lurking in the background of my ENTIRE Swing music project. Swing has two threads. Painting happens on one thread that you don't own, and your code runs on the other thread. When you look at your code, you build a constructor for some object, you fill in the fields and hand it off to some other object. Are all the fields set up? Normally, yes. By the time your constructor is finished the fields are all set up. 

But suppose instead that you create some object, like a NoteHead which is a Mass, it has a show routine and it has fields, You call the constructor for your NoteHead object. Because it is a Mass, it calls the super routine to first construct the Mass. Masses live in layers, the mass is added to the proper layer. AFTER you return from that call to super, you finish filling out the fields of your NoteHead object. HOWEVER, suppose something happened in the OS that forced it to call your paintComponent over in the paint thread. Paint wants to paint all the layers. It gets to the layer with your NoteHead in it and calls the show routine on that NoteHead, ALL BEFORE the NoteHead constructor got to fill in even a single field. OOPS!

Yes, in NORMAL operation, a mouse event ends a gesture, and you zip through the reactions, you select a winner, you construct an object, and then you call repaint. That call to repaint happens in your thread AFTER you have finished all the work of constructing objects in your thread. THAT call to repaint DID happen in proper serial order BUT you are not the ONLY one calling the repaint thread. Your code looks properly sequential and has no race conditions BUT what you see is not the truth.

The fix - well, there are several. 

1) Just ignore it - it almost never happens. The OS is NOT repainting your screen randomly and even if it does, the time between that call to Mass.super and NoteHead.constructor is a few lines of code. It is TINY. 

2) The second alternative is to NOT put a mass in the layers in the Mass.super - instead, require every single class that is an extension of Mass, to add itself explicitly to the Layers - this is more code that you must to remember to add - more code that you can forget about and wonder why you paint code isn't working until you realize that you forgot to add your object to the layers. 

3) A third alternative - put guards in your show code. Any thing that is being shown, should be guarded in case a field has not yet filled in. 

And my choice is ..wait for it.. option 1. Let the interns fix it. I am a designer. I am just trying to hack out code as fast as I can to see what will and will not work. My code is NEVER stable. I write it, I rip it out, I change it all the time. Writing extra code to guard against something that almost never happens, reguardles of whether I guard show routines or delay loading something into the layers just slows my development. I don't need that. 

So I live on the edge, race conditions may happen. Pointers might be null. I tuck this race condition into the back of my brain. Most of the time when I see a null pointer it will be null for the usual reason, I simply forgot to set something up correctly. But I do still have this fundamental multi-threading problem. There is always that moment when a Staff object has been constructed but we have not yet added the sys field yet so sys is not defined. 

In a single threaded application, sequence is clearly defined by your code. In a multi-threaded application however, one thread can do something right in the middle of a single line of code in the other thread. 

I call this to your attention with the fear that you will now worry about this problem every time you see a null pointer exception. That would be wrong. Null pointer problems are almost alway just a stupid omission on my part. I just forget to set something up.

And yet, you DO need to know that there really are monsters that lurk in the jungle waiting patiently for the chance to BITE you, if they can just move fast enough. Do not fear the Tiger. You will probably never see one. They are exceedingly rare, but they do exist. Do not close your mind to the possibility.

## Back to the code

Test it out. Was that number 30 too big or too small? I don't want just any vertical line that may have crossed several staffs to be considered a canditate for a Barline. 60 is pretty lax. We are using 8 for a value of H so the gap between lines in 16, so if you are within one line of the top and one line of the bottom it might be off by as much as 30. 

I saw a problem immediately when I tried to put a barline right at the right margin. I can't draw to the right on the right margin - the bid rejects it. And if I draw to the left, then it doesn't line up exactly.

If I want that "snap to the right margin" behavior I need to build it in. Let's relax the bid code to let me draw slightly outside of the right margin, and then allow the action code snap any x values that are close to the right. 

### relax the bid
```java
  if(x < m.lo || x > (m.hi+UC.barToMarginSnap)){return UC.noBid;}
```

### in the act routing
```java
  int RM = Page.PAGE.xMargin.hi;
  int x = g.vs.xM(); if(x > (RM-UC.barToMarginSnap)){x = RM;}
  new Bar(Staff.this.sys, x);}
```

Then put in the UC number to 20 or there abouts. Test it out and see if you like the snapping behavior.

Of course one of the things that we have not installed yet is that real measures do have an aversion to one another. You need enough space between them to place some notes and things. Right now we can put them right up against one another, so we will correct that now.

We want to add a Reaction to the Bar itself. The Bar reaction also looks for a S-S stroke that is very close to an existing bar. When that happens, we want it to outbid the simple create Bar gesture that the staff put up and instead treat it as a gesture to upgrade the existing Bar to a different type. It will cycle the types. So let us first create the cycleType function that will be the action. In fact, while we are at it, let's build the two fuctions that will allow us to toggle the Left and Right repeat bars as well. So these next 3 functions are the ways that we will be able to modify the barType.

### add to Bar    
```java
  public void cycleType(){barType++; if(barType > 2){barType = 0;}}
  public void toggleLeft(){barType = barType^LEFT;}
  public void toggleRight(){barType = barType^RIGHT;}
```

The reaction to upgrade an existing bar will want to reject bars that are drawn outside of the system so we mostly want them drawn between the system top and the system bottom.

### add to Bar constructor
```java
  addReaction(new Reaction("S-S"){ // cycle existing bar
    public int bid(Gesture g){
      int x = g.vs.xM();
      if(Math.abs(x - Bar.this.x) > 2*UC.barToMarginSnap){return UC.noBid;}
      int y1 = g.vs.yL(), y2 = g.vs.yH();
      int sysTop = Bar.this.sys.yTop(), sysBot = Bar.this.sys.yBot();
      if(y1 < (sysTop - 10) || y2 > (sysBot + 10)){return UC.noBid;}
      G.LoHi m = Page.PAGE.xMargin;
      if(x < m.lo || x > (m.hi+20)){return UC.noBid; }
      int d =  Math.abs(x - Bar.this.x);
      return (d > UC.barToMarginSnap) ? UC.noBid : d;
    }
    public void act(Gesture g){ Bar.this.cycle(); }
  });
```

Notice the value that I return for the bid here is the distance between the S-S stroke and the actual x value of the existing bar, and we REJECTED any such x that was NOT within UC.barToMarginSnap. So the maximum value that we will return in our bid here for a S-S that was close to an existing bar will be UC.barToMarginSnap.

Now I want this reaction to upgrade an existing Bar to OUTBID the other reaction to a S-S stroke which creates a new bar. 
  
In order for this to work correctly we need to adjust the bid code for that existing Staff Reaction which creates bars. Right now, a perfect staff reaction, where the two y values were spot on would give a perfect bid of zero so I am going to bias it up a bit. If I bias the amount that the createBar reaction bids so that it is always bigger than UC.barToMarginSnap then my barUpgrade reaction code will alway be able to underbid a createBar reaction. So we modify the bid code in the createBar reaction in Staff  

### in Staff constructor S-S reaction bid
```java
  return (d > 30) ? UC.noBid : d + UC.barToMarginSnap; // biased to prefer Bar cycle gesture
```

We have not yet updated our show to show the different bar types, but we could still test that the code to cycleType is working properly. 
    
### modify show code in Bar to include 
```java
  if(barType == 1){g.drawLine(x-4,staff.yTop(),x-4,staff.yBot());}
```

## Graphics helpers  

The visual apperance of the different bar types involve fat lines and thin lines and little lines that run at angles for the repeat bars and also some dots for the repeat bars, so we will write helpers that draw those particular shapes.

### add to Bar    
```java
  public static void wings(Graphics g, int x, int y1, int y2, int dx, int dy){
    g.drawLine(x, y1, x+dx, y1-dy);
    g.drawLine(x, y2, x+dx, y2+dy);
  }
  public static void fatBar(Graphics g, int x, int y1, int y2, int dx){g.fillRect(x, y1, dx, y2-y1);}
  public static void thinBar(Graphics g, int x, int y1, int y2){g.drawLine(x, y1, x, y2);}
  public void drawDots(Graphics g, int x, int top){ 
    // from top of single staff
    // notice - this code ASSUMES nLine is 5. We will need to fix if we ever allow
    // not-standard staffs.
    int H = sys.page.sysFmt.maxH;
    if((barType & LEFT) != 0){
      g.fillOval(x-3*H, top+11*H/4, H/2, H/2);
      g.fillOval(x-3*H, top+19*H/4, H/2, H/2);
    }
    if((barType & RIGHT) != 0){
      g.fillOval(x+3*H/2, top+11*H/4, H/2, H/2);
      g.fillOval(x+3*H/2, top+19*H/4, H/2, H/2);
    }
  }
```
  
When we draw the different types of Bars, we will draw them so that the fatBar, if there is one, hangs to the left of the x value for the Bar. This is done so that a Fine bar at the end of the peice, whose x value will be the right margin will exactly fit on the staff (that is the USUAL location for a Fine Bar, at the end of the piece). IF all your staff lines are the same size, which is certainly the most common layout, we would like to make the dx for the fat bar to be essentially the same as the thickness of a whole or half rest which is the value H, i.e. Half a line spacing. But if the staffs are not all the same size, then you want to choose the spacing that works for the largest size. We could look though all the staffs in the SYSFMT to find the maximum, but it is not really essential and we are not actually going to bother with different sized staffs for this project so we will just add a value, maxH to the SYSFMT object and make that the default staff H.

### add to Sys.Fmt
```java
  public int maxH = UC.defaultStaffH;
```

### modify Staff.Fmt constructor to use that default
```java
  this.H = UC.defaultStaffH; // default value of Staff H 
```

There is something else that we need to do in the Staff.Fmt class.

Now we have implied so far that barlines alway cut through every staff in the system, and indeed they always do, BUT sometimes they also go through the space between two adjacent staffs also. For example, piano parts always have two staffs, one for the right hand and one for the left, and the barlines always run from the top line of the Right Hand staff to the bottom line for the Left Hand staff. I believe that it is customary in orchestral music to have the barlines run from the top of the string section to the bottom of the string section, but to have a break between the strings and the woodwinds. 

I don't actually care about the particular customs and neither should you, what we do care about is including the feature to allow bars to draw between two adjacent staffs. We will allow the user to indicate how they want the bars to draw or to NOT draw in the intervening space by adding a reaction. If the user draws a S-S that goes exactly from the bottom line of one staff to the top line of the next staff in the first system, we will set a boolean value, barContinues, in the Staff.Fmt object for the first staff. Thus if you see barContinues for staff iStaff=7 you know that a the bar continue from staff 7 to staff 8.

### add member to Staff.Fmt and a function that toggles it
```java
  public boolean barContinues = false;
  public void toggleBarContinues(){barContinues = !barContinues;}
```

The Bar show code is somewhat complicated by this barContinues behavior. In particular, when you are doing repeat bars, which have little wing tips on them, those wing tips do NOT show up on every staff. They only show up that the ends of the long connected components, on the other hand, the dots that show up on a repeat bar DO show up on every staff. So we must build into the show code the logic that notices when we are at the top of a new connected component (which always comes just after a break) and to also notice when we have hit the end of a connected component (which always occures at places when bar does NOT continue). Only when we are at the end of a connected component will we have the two y values that we need to draw that connected component.

### add to Bar
```java
  public void show(Graphics g){
    g.setColor(Color.BLACK);
    int sysTop = sys.yTop(), y1=0, y2=0; // y1,y2 mark top and bot of connected component
    boolean justSawBreak = true; // signals when we are at the top of a new connected component
    for(Staff staff:sys.staffs){
      //Staff.Fmt sf = sys.fmt.get(i);
      int staffTop = staff.yTop();
      if(justSawBreak){y1 = staffTop;} // remember start of connected component
      y2 = staff.yBot();  // remember bottom of this staff
      if(!staff.fmt.barContinues){ // we now have a connected component from y1 to y2
        drawLines(g, y1, y2);  // lines show only at end of connected components
      }
      justSawBreak = !staff.fmt.barContinues;
      if(barType > 3){drawDots(g, x, staffTop); } // dots on every staff w/ repeats
    }
  }
```

and here is the helper routine to draw the vertical lines:

### add to Bar
```java
  public void drawLines(Graphics g, int y1, int y2){
    int H = sys.page.sysFmt.maxH;
    if(barType == 0){ thinBar(g, x, y1, y2);}
    if(barType == 1){ thinBar(g, x, y1, y2); thinBar(g, x-H, y1, y2);}
    if(barType == 2){ fatBar(g, x-H, y1, y2, H); thinBar(g, x-2*H, y1, y2);}
    if(barType >= 4){ fatBar(g, x-H, y1, y2, H); // all repeats have fat bar
      if((barType&LEFT) != 0){thinBar(g, x-2*H, y1, y2); wings(g, x-2*H, y1, y2, -H, H);}
      if((barType&RIGHT) != 0){thinBar(g, x+H, y1, y2); wings(g, x+H, y1, y2, H, H);}
    }
  }
```

That should finish the graphics code that we needed to draw all the varient types of Bars. With that in place, we are ready to create the reaction.
      
### add to Staff constructor
```java
  addReaction(new Reaction("S-S"){ // toggle BarContinues
    public int bid(Gesture g){
      if(Staff.this.sys.iSys != 0){return UC.noBid;} // we only change bar continues in first system
      int y1 = g.vs.yL(), y2 = g.vs.yH();
      int iStaff = Staff.this.iStaff;
      if(iStaff == Page.PAGE.sysFmt.size()-1 ){return UC.noBid;} // last staff in sys can't continue
      if(Math.abs(y1 - Staff.this.yBot()) > 20){return UC.noBid;}
      Staff nextStaff = Staff.this.sys.staffs.get(iStaff + 1);
      if(Math.abs(y2 - nextStaff.yTop()) > 20){return UC.noBid;}
      return 10;
    }
    public void act(Gesture g){
      Page.PAGE.sysFmt.get(Staff.this.iStaff).toggleBarContinues();
    }
  });
```

## Day 12  

We will also want a reation to allow us to dot an existing Bar on either the right or left and call the appropriate toggleLeft and toggleRight routines that we just created.

### add to Bar constructor
```java
  addReaction(new Reaction("DOT"){ // Dot this Bar
    public int bid(Gesture g){
      int x = g.vs.xM();
      int y = g.vs.yM();
      if(y < Bar.this.sys.yTop() || y > Bar.this.sys.yBot()){ return UC.noBid; }
      int dist = Math.abs(x - Bar.this.x);
      if(dist > 3*Page.PAGE.sysFmt.maxH){ return UC.noBid; }
      return dist;
    }
    public void act(Gesture g){
      if(g.vs.xM() < Bar.this.x){ Bar.this.toggleLeft(); }else { Bar.this.toggleRight(); }
    }
  });
```

## Bar Version 1 - Post-Mortem

We will quit for now with Bars able to draw our different barTypes. There are other things that we will eventually need to do with Bars but we don't need them immediately. For one thing, the entire reason that we needed a double bar is that a double bar is something that indicates to the musician that you are changing the KeySig of the piece or possibly the TimeSig, so eventually double bars need to hold information like that. For another thing, it is useful to be able to talk about measure 7 in a piece and since measures start and end at barlines it is nice to have a list of all the barlines so that you can count them and write measure numbers above them. 

This is of course a modern invention - In DA OLDE DAYS, you didn't write measure numbers over measure bars, but you did occasionally write a letter in a circle above a bar. Then the conductor could say to the band, "I want us all to start 5 measures after letter C on page 9". Now that we type set with computers and since computers can obssively count and number every measure, that information is often included for free along with the circled letters that you MUST support because hey, that's the tradition, and yeah, someday we should include the notion of hanging a circled letter over a measure bar as well.

In some ways, Bars are a good example of the type of change that happens as you evolve a system. It started out being simple code that ONLY drew lines across each staff. There was no notion of barContinues in the Staff.Fmt there were no connected components to draw. In order to get the more complicated look that shows up in real music we needed to 1) find a place in our data structures that could HOLD the information that allowed for the more complicated drawing, 2) modify our drawing code to respect and use that extra information during the drawing, 3) create a GUI component, i.e. a Gesture that would let the user insert their choices into the more complicated data structure.

As you can see, we had to hop all over the code in order to insert that behavior. The logical place to hold the barContinues information was the Staff.Fmt class. The GUI component, the reaction, had to be attached to a Mass so we used a Staff to notice that the user wanted to change the way that barlines cut through the systems. And of course, finally the drawing code was there in the Bar class, where you would expect it.

The reason that I wanted to have at least a few stand alone applications, like Music1 was so that you can remember the evolutionary path by which we got to a genuine complicated application. Eventually this Bar class will evolve away from the simple thing that it is. Sys will get a new field, ArrayList<Bar> bars, so that we can enumerate all the bars in a piece of music. The Bar constructor will need to insert new bars into the array list. If we eventually build a Measure class to hold all the notes in a single measure, dropping a new barline into the middle of one, must divide up all the notes that were in the measure that you were splitting.

All this complexity grows in a codebase and it makes it hard to look at the code and to see how it started as a fairly simple thing. We will probably only do one more sprint, taking us through Heads, Stems, Beams, Rests - the REAL stuff of music before we give up on doing stand alone archives and will split this all out into Music classes that will just evolve and grow as code should.

## Update
Actually, and I am writing this a year after I wrote the above paragraph. When I taught this course previously we DID do one more sprint, writing a single Music2 class with DOZENS of more nested classes for heads, stems etc. It was a royal PAIN! 

Scrolling back and forth across hundreds of lines of code just to find the nested class where you wanted to change something was a nightmare. We did it, we did get yet another stand alone calss that showed a second development milestone, but IMHO it was not worth the editing pain!

SO going forward, regardless of what these notes say (at least until I can rewrite all of it), you should copy the classes from Music1, Sys, Staff, Bar etc, into stand alone classes in the music package at this point. Create an AaMusic class as well in music that will be the extension of Window that is currently the huge file Music 1 and make whatever changes are necessary to get it all working. (The "aa" in the front of the name just makes the app sort to the front of a file list.)

When you split things up into individual classes you will note that the static variable PAGE, which was in the music1 app, is used in Sys,Staff, and Bar. I decided, rather arbitrarily, that this assumption that we are just building a one page application should be spelled out in the Page class rather than in the AaMusic class. So I moved the static variable, PAGE into the Page class. Remove PAGE from AaMusic, and then in every class where I used to reference PAGE, I changed it to Page.PAGE. I prefered that to references to AaMusic.PAGE scattered throughout the music classes.

Now in this rewrite of Music1, I don't mean that you should throw out all nesting of classes. Staff.Fmt really should be nested in Staff because it is just a helper for Staffs. We will also continue to used nested classes like List and Map when we need simple extension classes, but we are ready to code the music classes as stand alone classes.
## End Update

[next: Chapter 7 Music Notes - Glyphs](MJ0701.md)
