## MidJava 6-4 Music [&LT;](MJ0603.md) [&GT;](MJ0605.md)
# Sys and Staff

We have already outlined these classes and defined the members that they needed to have. We are ready to put in the functions that will give coordinates to these shapes and can show them to the screen. The only x coordinates that we need are already there in the xMargins of the Page, but we will need y coordinate functions in nearly every class.

First of all, both Sys.Fmt and Staff.Fmt do NOT have y positions, but the both have height. You can not show either of the FMTs directly because they do not have y positions BUT the will both have showAt routines where you supply the y coordinate, the top of either the sys or the staff. Sys and Staff on the other hand DO both have yTop coordinates so we will with a yTop function in each of those classes. Lets start with the routines in the FMT classes

### in Staff.Fmt add
```java
  public int height(){return 2*H*(nLines -1);}
  public void showAt(Graphics g, int y, Page page){
    g.setColor(Color.GRAY);
    int x1 = page.xMargin.lo, x2 = page.xMargin.hi, h = 2*H; 
    for(int i=0; i<nLines; i++){g.drawLine(x1,y,x2,y); y+=h;}
  }
```

### in Sys.Fmt add
```java
  public int height(){int last = size()-1; return staffOffsets.get(last) + get(last).height();}
  public void showAt(Graphics g, int y, Page page){
    for(int i=0; i<size(); i++){get(i).showAt(g, y+staffOffsets.get(i), page);}
    int x1 = page.xMargin.lo, x2 = page.xMargin.hi, y2 = y + height();
    g.drawLine(x1,y,x1,y2);
    g.drawLine(x2,y,x2,y2);
  }
```

Since Systems are spread evenly down the page, each one the same height and separated by a single constant space, sysGap which is a member in Page. It is the Page that can calculate the top line of a give system if it knows what number it is. So we build these helpers in Page. (I included a second one that will be helpful when we want to limit bidding to gestures that go below everything on the current page.)

### in Page add
```java
  public int sysTop(int iSys){return yMargin.lo + iSys*(sysFmt.height() + sysGap);}
  public int allSysBot(){int n = sysList.size(); return yMargin.lo + n*sysFmt.height() + (n-1)*sysGap;}
```

which lets us now build the yTop functions for both Sys and Staff

### in Sys add
```java
  public int yTop(){return page.sysTop(iSys);} 
```

### in Staff add
```java
  public int yTop(){return sys.yTop() + sys.page.sysFmt.staffOffsets.get(iStaff);}
```

And with all of those y calculations and showAt functions we still have not got anything that is showing systems on the page. We have a decision to make. The page is in the layers, every system is in the layers, every single staff in every single system is in the layers. We do NOT want show routines on every single one. We don't want the staffs showing themselves if the systems are showing themselves by going through lists and showing every staff.

Well, the showAt routine in Staff.Fmt has the for loop that draws the 5 lines staff, the showAt routine in Sys.Fmt was the for loop that went though each Staff.Fmt in the list and called its showAt routine. It makes sense to back up one more layer and let the single Page object, which is the one that holds the list of all the systems on the page, to be the object that shows the entire mess.

### in Page add
```java
  public void show(Graphics g){
    for(int i=0; i<sysList.size(); i++){sysFmt.showAt(g, sysTop(i), this);}
  }
```

And with all of those changes you can now run the app and you should see that you do in fact get a staff at the location of your first E-W stroke. However, you will see nothing else after that because we have not yet added the two other reactions that we need in the Page constructor. (Remember, we have a single E-W initial reaction which we allowed to run once and then disabled it.)

## Reactions 
### in Page constructor add two reactions
```java
  addReaction(new Reaction("E-W"){ // add new staff to the growing Sys.Fmt
    public int bid(Gesture g){return (g.vs.yM() < PAGE.allSysBot())?UC.noBid:0;}
    public void act(Gesture g){addNewStaffFmtToSysFmt(g.vs.yM());}
  });
  
  addReaction(new Reaction("W-W"){ // terminate Sys.Fmt growth, define sysGap, add sys
    public int bid(Gesture g){return (g.vs.yM() < PAGE.allSysBot())?UC.noBid:0;}
    public void act(Gesture g){
      if(PAGE.sysList.size() == 1){
        PAGE.sysGap = g.vs.yM() - PAGE.allSysBot();
      }
      addNewSys();
    }
  }); 
```

With those two reactions in place you should be able to define your systems and put multiple systems on the page. Do test it out.

One of the things that you might want to do, is to have the addition of the second system to the page actively disable the reaction to add a new staff to the existing system definition. Without it, the system has some seriously bizarre behavior that you WOULD have discoverd when you tested the app IF you did a thurough testing, which of course no one EVER does.

Suppose I draw an E-W stroke and a second to get a nice piano system with two staffs. Then I add a second system after that. I NOW have 4 staffs on the screen grouped into two systems. If I now go all the way down below all four staffs and draw yet another E-W, the bid routine likes it because it was below everything that was drawn on the page so it adds a third staff to the sysFmt but the Offset is WAY below the second staff because you had to skip over the second system to draw the gesture.

Go ahead and do it now. It is a good way to verify that that code we put in to keep all the systems and staffs in synch with their formats was doing the right thing, but really, we don't want the first reaction to continue to be active once the second system has been added. 

In order to disable a reaction we need to know where it is. We disabled one reaction already in this app, when we disabled the only initial reaction. We KNEW where that one was, it was on that initial Reactions list but where is the first reaction? Well it is in the reaction list that makes up the Mass that the Page extended, BUT I am just going to make it more visible by captureing it in a variable R1.

### add a new static variable to the Page class
```java
  private static Reaction R1;
```

modify the creation of the first reaction to "capture" it
```java
  addReaction(R1 = new Reaction("E-W"){ // add new staff to the growing Sys.Fmt  
```

### disable it, when you drew the second system
```java
  if(PAGE.sysList.size() == 1){
    PAGE.sysGap = g.vs.yM() - PAGE.allSysBot();
    R1.disable(); // disable further additions to sysFmt
  }
```

In the next section I will compile all the code for Music, Page, Sys, and Staff but before that I have one comment on the name of the ArrayList<Staff> staffs variable that shows up in Sys.

## SIDEBAR - Footnote on English pluralization. 

The English pluralization of the word 'staff' is irregular. The proper English word is 'staves'. I almost never use irregular English pluralizations when I name variables in code. 

Code is more important than English. the word 'staff' means "a single staff object" and the word 'staffs' means "a single object that is probably either an array or an array list containing multiple staff objects". As you can see, neither word has ANTHING to do with the English meaning of 'staff' and thus English pluralization is unimportant in this context. 

I ONLY call this to your attention for this reason:

When I was using Ruby on Rails many years ago when it was the hip thing to do, they used name conventions similar to the above where when you named a variable or class 'foo' to hold a single object you could use a variable named 'foos' to get an array of those objects and SOMEONE involved in the development of Rails (probably someone from Brazil - where Rails was widly used) foolishly decided that the code for auto-generating these names should use proper English pluralization. So if you had a 'person' object then an array of those should be named 'people' NOT 'persons'. 

This was EVIL! It was WRONG! 

I do understand why it happened. Someone who learns English as a second language usually takes pride in knowing the proper exceptions and irregular grammar. It shows how careful they were in their schooling. BRAVO!

However as a native English speaker, I can speak English quite fluently, but unlike a well schooled 'English as a second language' speaker I take NO PRIDE in it. English is GARBAGE! The language sucks! It was invented by Barbarians who knew NOTHING about code! They did not know how to spell.

Now in the context of code, regularity beats proper English EVERY TIME! The problem with the Rails, using 'proper' English, was that Rails had a function hidden in it somewhere that in order to pluralize names into proper English had to have a list of exceptional spellings - none of which was documented! 

So did that list buried in the code somewhere actually contain EVERY single exceptionl pluralization that ever occurs in the English language? Did they include every dialectical variation? Could I, even as a native speaker, KNOW before testing it which names would work in the code and which ones would not? -NO, I COULD NOT! - It was just a BAD idea. 

Ever since looking at that particular mess I TRY to be more careful about NEVER EVER using proper English in my code. In my code the plural of 'person' is 'persons' the plural of 'man' is 'mans' the plural of 'sheep' is 'sheeps' and yes as much as it pains me to look at it -- the plural of 'sys' is 'syss' or possibly 'sysList'. In code, one regular pluralization rule - 'just add an s' - is FAR superior to proper English. 

Keep your code Simple! Use Simple grammar, Simple English, NOT proper English!

--END OF SIDEBAR

Next section we will summarize the code up to this point and then in the section after we will work on Barlines (vertical lines that cut through systems),

[next: Code summary](MJ0605.md)