## MidJava 6-2 Music [&LT;](MJ0601.md) [&GT;](MJ0603.md)

## Music.java

Music will be the the name of the application that will hold our music notation. We will build it in the sandbox like all our other apps but it will probably not change very much. Most of the code and most of the classes that we build from here on out will be in the music package.

In previous versions of this course I used lots of nested classes, too many in fact and we spent too much time fighting the IDE that allows but does not really support nested classes. So I have rewritten this section to simply use stand alone classes from the beginning. This ROBs you of that opportunity to do a MAJOR refactoring later on in the course. I once devoted half a class to showing you how to rip apart a chunk of code that was all done with nested classes and move them all into standard classes. Oh well, you'll just have to collect that experience on your own.

Our first sprint will be to construct the classes needed for the "coordinate systems" for the music. This will include the classes Page, Sys, Sys.Fmt, Staff, Staff.Fmt, and Bar. The primary goal is to get to the point that we have the background objects that we need to be able to enter music. We MAY also include some other classes, KeySig, TimeSig, Clef that are also in some sense part of the format for the Systems.

However before we start on that I have some minor fixes to our current code base:

## Minor Fixes

1) I dislike some of the names that I selected in the undo code. I had a pair "doGesture" and "undoableGesture" that either did NOT add to the UNDO list or did add to the undoList. "undoable" was meant to suggest that it added the gesture to the UNDO list. However on reflection it seems to suggest that the gesture can NOT be undone and quite the opposite is true. I tried other longer names like, "doGestureAndAddToUndo", which is certainly clear if long. I have decided instead to rename those two functions in my code. Instead of focusing on what they do (do they add to UNDO or not), I should focus on how they are used, so I reaname doGesture to redoGesture and renames undoableGesture to doGesture. The name "redoGesture" should make it clear that it is the one that you should call when you are "redoing" gestures from the UNDO list and thus should NOT be adding to the UNDO list.

2) I had some shape recognition problems that required a slight mod to the trainer. The problem I had was that an E-E stroke was being recognized as an E-S. My problem was that I did not have enough E-E prototypes.

The fix: during shape training you KNOW what shape that the user is drawing. You can first do a recognition and if the result was NOT properly recognized you do NOT want to blend that ink into some existing prototype, you instead want to force it onto the prototype list. 

Basically, when you blend, you are smoothing an existing prototype which makes that prototype better, But a misrecognition means that the existing prototypes were NOT sufficient to capture the stroke that you just entered so the just entered stroke should be considered to be a new prototype, not just a smoothing of an old one.

The fix is to add a routine to Shape.Database to insert a new prototype
```java
  public void addPrototype(String name){if(isLegal(name)){forceShape(name).prototypes.add(new Prototype());}}
```

we had a function in Prototype.List that we named 'train' but what it was really doing was blending if it could. So rename that function 'blend'.

Now in Database modify the old train function to be this one which forces a prototype add on a misrecognition:

```java
  public void train(String name, Ink ink){
    if(isLegal(name)){
      Shape rs = recognize(ink);
      if(rs == null ||!rs.name.equals(name)){
        addPrototype(name);
      } else {
        rs.prototypes.blend(ink.norm);
      }
    }
  }
```

And finally change the line in the mouse up code in the trainer to properly call the train function (the train function used to require an Ink.Norm now it just uses Ink directly)

Notice: When you make this change you will BREAK your saved database file (because you redefined the class Shape.Database which was being serialized) so you will get to ONCE AGAIN run the shape trainer and load in the shapes that we need for our applications.

At this point be sure to train N-N, E-E, E-W, SW-SW, S-S, we will be using the retrace E-W real soon now.

End of minor fixes. Onward to our Systems and Staffs

## Sys and Staff

Even though we know that some of the classes that we will need will be **Sys** and **Staff**, instead of starting at the class definitions, let's think for a moment about the **Gestures** that we want to work from.

When I see that initial blank page in front of me, I want to be able to do an E-W stroke to put the very first Staff on the page. The top of that staff should be right where I drew that E-W stroke.

As we know from our build of Undo, that first reaction actually lives in the initialReactions, rather than being held by a Mass object out in the layers, and that initial reactions does a LOT! It must create our first and only **Page** object (our app at this point will NOT be a multi-page application), That E-W stroke also defined the upper margin on the page. It then creates that first Staff AND it creates the first **Sys** to hold that staff and it creates a **Staff.Fmt** object to define what the staff looks like and it crates a **Sys.Fmt** object to define what a typical system looks like.

When I draw my next E-W stroke somewhere under that first staff, it should clearly create a second staff. However one important question is whether that second staff should be part of the same system as the first staff or not? How can I distinguish between the behaviors that are essentially adding a new staff to the first system (and thus effectively changing/redefining the system format) vs. a gesture that tells me that I am done with the system definition and am ready to just add more systems to the page.

Using different gestures for those different action is usually a good choice, so let us think of E-W as the shape that adds a Staff to the growing Sys.Fmt, an E-W is essentially expanding our definition of what a system is, but a E-E stroke (which is just another way to empahsize a single Y value) will in some sense signal that we are done with the definition of the Sys.Fmt and are ready to add a new Sys to the page. 

The basic idea is that the user will do several E-W strokes, which will add to the growing Sys.Fmt definition, and then eventually end the system-Definition phase by drawing an W-W stroke.

In much the way that we had that first E-W stroke define the top margin of the page, that first E-E stroke can define the size of the extra space that we will want to leave between systems on the page. And in fact, once we know the height of the system and the size of the gap between them we can easily calculate how many systems fit on one page and because they should be evenly spaced. This means that we can calculate what the y value for the top of any system on the page should be just by knowing which number it is on the page.

I think I will actually create 3 reactions total in this first sprint. The one in the initialReactions will be an E-W that creates the single page and defines our top margin. When the page is defined, it will disable that initial reaction and hold two reactions of its own, one to add new staffs to the growing definition of the system and one to shut down that system definition and add that second system.

## Generic Reaction App
We will first need a rather generic Reaction app

### create Music.java in sandbox
```java
  public class Music extends Window{
    public Layer BACK = new Layer("BACK"), FORE = new Layer("FORE");
    public Music(){super("Music1", UC.mainWindowWidth, UC.mainWindowHeight);}
    public void paintComponent(Graphics g){
      G.fillBackground(g,Color.WHITE);
      Layer.ALL.show(g);
      g.setColor(Color.BLACK); Ink.BUFFER.show(g);
    }
    public void mousePressed(MouseEvent me){Gesture.AREA.dn(me.getX(), me.getY()); repaint();}
    public void mouseDragged(MouseEvent me){Gesture.AREA.drag(me.getX(), me.getY()); repaint();}
    public void mouseReleased(MouseEvent me){Gesture.AREA.up(me.getX(), me.getY()); repaint();}
  }
```

## Outline of Page,Sys,Staff

To remind you, the music notions are that a **Staff** is the set of five lines, a **Sys** is a collection of several staffs, and a page is a collection of several systems, and we will have classes that represent all of those things. However there is much repetition in that data and we will build some additional helper classes, namely **Sys.Fmt** and **Staff.Fmt** that will deal with that repetition. 

The easiest example of why we use these helpers is that staff of 5 lines. We will define a class, **Staff.Fmt**, that keeps track of how many lines the staff has and how far apart they are spaced. That Fmt class is essentially the "LOOK" of that staff. What is missing from the Fmt is WHERE on the screen we will draw that particular staff. The reason is that that particular line/layout look is shared by many different staffs (in fact it is usually shared by all of them), which is why we factor it out. So a Staff is in some sense really only responsible for knowing WHERE the staff goes and WHAT format object it uses. 

However, when I say that the staff needs to know where it goes, I am less concerned with the y-coordinate graphical information but rather WHERE in the musical sense it goes. That staff belongs to a particular system AND the important notion is how far down in the System it is. 

For example a Flute sonata (flute and piano) will have 3 staffs in the order Flute, Piano right hand, and Piano left hand. What the staff really needs to know is its index in the system. So if the staff is at index 1, that makes it the Piano Right Hand staff and it should be using the piano right hand staff format. So here is roughly what I am thinking for a Staff class

### create Staff.java in the music package
```java
  //-------------------STAFF------------------
  public class Staff extends Mass{
    public Sys sys;       // the system that this staff lives in
    public int iStaff;    // the index of WHERE it lives in the system
    public Staff.Fmt fmt;  // the format used for drawing this staff
    
    public Staff(sys, iStaff){this.sys = sys; this.iStaff = iStaff, fmt = sys.page.sysFmt.get(iStaff);}
  
    //-----------------STAFF FMT--------------------
    public static class Fmt{
      public int nLines = 5, H = 8; 
    }
```

Similarly a system lives on a page which has a list of systems.

### create Sys.java in music package
```java
  public class Sys extends Mass{
    public ArrayList<Staff> staffs = new ArrayList<>();
    public Page page;
    public int iSys;
  
    public Sys(Page page, int iSys){
      super("BACK"); this.page = page; this.iSys = iSys;
    }
     
    public void addNewStaff(int iStaff){staffs.add(new Staff(this, iStaff));}
  
    //-----------------SYS FMT--------------------
    public static class Fmt extends ArrayList<Staff.Fmt>{
      public ArrayList<Integer> staffOffsets= new ArrayList<>();
      
      public void addNew(int yOff){add(new Staff.Fmt()); staffOffsets.add(yOff);}
    }
  }
```

Notice that the Sys.Fmt IS a list of Staff.Fmts, and it hangs onto another list that is the actual y-coordinate offsets, one for each staff. The notion being that a single system for that Flute Sonata IS that list of 3 Staff.Fmts, the Flute and the 2 Piano parts, and each one of those staffs will belong at a fixed offset from where the actual System starts. Thus that block of 3 staffs will always have that same layout, OR looked at differently, if you want to change the layout of the entire piece, spreading the two piano parts a little further apart than typical, you change ONE offset in the sys format and ALL the systems that are using that format adjust to that change.

Essentially what we are doing is facing the fact that while any single staff DOES in fact have a yTop, i.e. a y coordinate for its top line, that yTop must be calculated, because that coordinate came from the fact that the staff was the third one down in the system and it was on the second system on the page.

Time to start building our Page class.

[next: Page](MJ0603.md)