## MidJava 7-3 Music Notes [&LT;](MJ0702.md) [&GT;](MJ0704.md)
# Head

We will start with note heads, which is the class Head. I won't even bother to try to outline where this class will be going. It will get where we want it to go by "progressive refinement". I want this example to be more in the style that I use most often, KISS, Keep It Simple Stupid! I try to write the least amount of code that I can that will let me display something and test something. In particular I want to test my note entry gesture, so the class that I build at this point ignores things like the shape of the note, or the fact that notes belong to shared time value. We will get all of that by refinement later. So here is a simple head class:

### create Head class
```java
  public class Head extends Mass{
    public Staff staff;
    public int x, line; // line is a yCoord in disguise. Line 0 is top line, line 1 is first space, line 2 is next line down.
    
    public Head(Staff staff, int x, int y){
      super("NOTE"); this.staff = staff; this.x = x;
      int H = staff.H();
      int top = staff.yTop() - H; // y could be in the space above the top line which becomes -1
      line = (y-top + H/2 + 50*H)/H - 50; // snap y to nearest line (50 forces positive division)
      System.out.println("Line: "+line);
    }
  
    public void show(Graphics g){
      int H = staff.H();  // this function does not exist yet. It is easy. Go write it.
      Glyph.HEAD_Q.showAt(g,H,x, staff.yTop()+line*H);
    }
  }
```

I made the decision that the Head constructor should be responsible for the "snapping" to a particular line. This means that the gesture action can just pass the center y value of the gesture into the Head constructor which will figure out the line that coresponds to that y. The Y coordinates are of course in pixels but the lines are in units of H so a division by H converts from pixels scale to H scale. You will see that I added in an H/2. This is because integer division truncates, it does not round, so a number like 0.9 gets truncated to zero instead of being rounded up to 1. If you add in 0.5 before you truncate, you get rounding behavior. 

The addition of 50*H and then the subtraction of 50 after the division forced the numbers up into the positive number range before doing the division. This is NECESSARY because NO computer hardware or compiler software actaully does the CORRECT thing when doing division with negative numbers. Some truncate one way (toward 0), some truncate the other way (toward -infinity). Some compilers allow the hardware to dictate their behavior (thus producing fast code as the expense of knowing what the code does), others "standardize" but different compilers/languages don't all standardize the same way. Sure, you could test Java to see what it does. Does that mean it will work the same on all different virtual machines? The safe approach - EVERYONE, hardware and software, agree on what happens when both values in a division are positive, so just NEVER allow negative numbers into an integer division if you can avoid it.

In order to actually create a note we need a gesture in the staff class

### add to Staff constructor
```java
  addReaction(new Reaction("SW-SW"){ // add Note to Staff
    public int bid(Gesture g){
      int x = g.vs.xM(), y = g.vs.yM();
      if(x < PAGE.left || x > PAGE.right){return UC.noBid;}
      int H = Staff.this.H(), top = Staff.this.yTop()-H,  bot = Staff.this.yBot()+H;
      if(y < top || y > bot){return UC.noBid;}
      return 10;
    }
    public void act(Gesture g){
      new Head(Staff.this, g.vs.xM(), g.vs.yM());
    }
  });
```

And for completeness we do need this function in Staff as well:
### add to Staff
```java
  public int H(){return fmt.H;}
```

Check it out. CRASH! No NOTE layer was defined. I decided to fix the way we were introducing layers. Previously I was creating static variables and giving them names, BUT I am never using those static variables, I am always just looking up the strings. So I replace the static variables in AaMusic with a single static block defining 3 layers.

### replace Layer static variables by static block
```java
  static{new Layer("BACK");  new Layer("NOTE"); new Layer("FORE");}
```

Now I seem to be able to add notes.

[next: Time](MJ0704.md)