## MidJava 7-4 Music Notes [&LT;](MJ0703.md) [&GT;](MJ0705.md)
# Time

A more significant drawback to the Head code as it currently exists is that you can draw note heads with ANY x value. In standard music notation x alignment is VERY important. It is time. If two notes are written one exactly over the other, i.e. sharing an x value, they are sounded at the same time. It is a "chord". On the other hand, if the two notes are NOT in a chord, they should NOT overlap at all, you need some visual space between the notes to see that one comes after the other.

Basically the behavior that we want is this, the musician should be able to place a note anywhere, any x value, BUT once there is a note at an x-value, then any note (int the same system) that was drawn close to that same x-value MUST snap to share that same x. If the second note head is drawn sufficiently far away, then it can create a new x value which can be shared just like the first one.

So we will need something that corresponds to a pool of shared x values and we will need a name for that x value object. The name that I have selected is "Time" because that is what is actually being shared by the notes. Notes with a common x, are all sounded at the same time. So let us build that class. 

### create Time class
```java
  public class Time{
    public int x;
  
    private Time(int x, List tl){this.x = x; tl.add(this);} // factory - apps call getTime(x)
  
    //---------------------TIME LIST---------------------------------
    public static class List extends ArrayList<Time>{
      public Sys sys; // lists of times are shared across a single sys
      public List(Sys sys){this.sys = sys;}
      public static Time getTime(int x){... returns time close to x OR creates new and returns that...}
    }
  }
```

We must now upgrade the Sys class so that every sys contains a time list 
### add to Sys
```java
  public Time.List times;
```

### and initialize it in the constructor
```java
  times = new Time.List(this);
```

### write an accessor routine
```java
  public Time getTime(int x){return times.getTime(x);}
```

With system upgraded like that, we will now upgrade our Head class to no longer use x. Instead it uses time.

### add Time to Head class & constructor
```java
  public static class Head extends Mass{
    public Staff staff;
    public int line; 
    public Time time;  // uses time instead of x
    
    public Head(Staff staff, int x, int y){
      super("NOTE"); this.staff = staff; this.time = staff.sys.getTime(x);
      ...
```

And don't forget to fix the show routine to now use time.x instead of x.

This should work as soon as we actually write the code that we skipped over in the time class to get the closest time. How close forces a snap? I used a threshold of 30 which I put into UC.snapTime.

### add to UC
```java
  public static final int snapTime = 30;
```

### add to Time.List
```java
  public Time getTime(int x){
    Time res = null; int dist = UC.snapTime;
    for(Time t : this){
      int d = Math.abs(t.x - x);
      if(d < dist){dist = d; res = t;} // only finds time if less than snap time
    }
    return (res != null) ? res : new Time(x, this);}
  }
```

That should work. Run the app. If you haven't yet removed that first head that was being drawn to test the glyph class don't make the mistake of thinking that it has a time value. You can draw notes close to it that partially overlap, but the ones that you do draw should have time values and you should see that time snapping in action.

The next thing that I wanted to add to the Head class was the notion of headShape or type of head so that I can enter half notes and whole notes. I also want to put dots on notes, BUT after thinking about it, I am rather inclined to keep all that information in the Stem class that we have not written yet. The reason is that all the heads on a single stem are part of a chord and share things liken number of flags and dots. So rather than keep dots associated with heads, I keep dots associated with stems and thus all the heads on a single stem automatically share the number of dots. 

In fact, the flags and the dots on a stem, essentially define the "duration" of the note and the other thing that has a duration is a rest. Rests can hold dots, and the fact is that every rest faster than a quarter rest has "flags" on it as well. So next up will will build a class to hold the common information needed by both stems and rests.

 [next: Duration](MJ0705.md)