## MidJava 7-13 Music Notes [&LT;](MJ0712.md) [&GT;](MJ0714.md)
# Accidentals

There are 5 basic accidentals in the system. Sharps, Flats, DoubleSharps, DoubleFlats, and Naturals.

I think that it is time for a Homework assignment. If you have made it this far you can probably write this yourself. I will outline what you should be able to do. You can try to write the code yourself, and then in the next section, I will show you my solution.

First and formost, The hardest thing about accidentals is the routine to draw them out CORRECTLY. We are going to do the simple thing, not the hard thing. The simple thing is correct for simple music and will work as a stub until we get around to doing the hard thing.

The 5 accidentals are just 5 different glyphs that are in the Sinfonia Font, and any note head can have one of these glyphs written in front of that note head.

This means that you will need to add a new member to Head, either an int or a glyph telling you whether or not this head needs the accidental drawn in front of it.

We could create a class for the accidentals, have them live in the layers, have the heads know about them and them know about their heads and do all the garbage to properly make and break relations between them. OR much simpler, you can just add a new member to the head class that holds the glyph that is the optional accidental for this head, and when you draw a head, you must also draw the accidental in front if it has one.

The second option is easy and that is your homework. The only reason that it is NOT correct is because unfortunately by long standing music notation tradition, all the accidental are drawn LARGER in the Y dimension than the note heads themselves and as a result if you have a stack of notes all close to one another on one stem, the accidentals would overlap. To prevent overlap, the accidentals need to be staggered in the x direction in front of the heads. (And there are bizzare traditional rules about how that staggering must take place). 

This means that you CAN'T properly decide on the x location for your accidental without looking at the other heads in the same stack and seeing if they also have accidetals on them and doing some work to avoid collisions. However, as long as the music does not STACK up accidentals, the simple implementation is correct.

So for your simple homework just add an accidental member to Head and update the show routine to draw the accidental (if it is non-null) off to the left of the head.x()

## Accidental reactions

Because the MUSICAL notion of an accidental is to raise or lower the pitch of a head slighly from the line or space that it is drawn on, we will want to use gestures that resemble the up arrow ("NE-SE") to sharp and to double sharp, and use a down arrow ("SE-NE") to flat and double flat. 

The Hot-Spot of those arrow gestures should be the location of the tip of the arrow. This means that when raising an accidental on a note head, the user will PROBABLY try to make the tip of the arrow land right in the center of the targeted note head. (or if you are being generous, you could stretch the recognition boundry for the bid routine to allow the user to target the space just to the left of the note head which is where the accidental would show up. Even in that case I would still recognize an arrow that lands right on the note head as affecting the accidental for that Head. It is easier to target an existing object than to target empty space.)

I would implement a helper function that just uses the up arrow to cycle the accidental up and the down arrow to cycle down. This implies that I would probably NOT make the accidental member a Glyph object but rather just an integer that can go up and down between the various choices and then using the value of that integer to decide what glyph to draw.

So that would be two new reactions to Head one that increments the accidental and one that decrements it.

## Deletion of Accidental

The easy thing would be if you increment or decrement out of range, the accidental goes away (the integer becomes a single illegal value which means no accidental). And make no mistake, I always do the easy thing first. With any luck it is good enough that you never need to do the more challenging thing.

The more challenging thing would be to allow a "S-N" gesture on the accidental be the gesture that deletes the accidental. The ONLY trick to that is that since the Accidental does not really exist (it is not a Mass in the layers) it means tha the delete accidental reaction needs to exist in the Head object that has that accidental. The Head just needs to do that bid calculation using the coordinates that it used when it was placing the accidental so that it LOOKS as if the accidental was a real object and the S-N gesture was targeting the accidental.

That should be enough information for you to write some code. 

Oh yes, the ordering for the accidentals from the lowest to highest is DoubleFlat, Flat, Natural, Sharp, DoubleSharp. A virgin head goes to Sharp if you up arrow on it, and it goes to Flat if you down arrow on it. So to get a Natural you first up then down OR you first down then up. Basically you get Sharp or Flat with one single gesture, you need two gestures to get Natural, or either of the Doubles.
 
Also, I should warn you that while the accidentals ARE located in the Sinfonia Font, they are NOT yet in the Glyph class. You will need to locate them and figure out where to draw them. Now I realize that this MIGHT be too much work, particularly if you don't know music notation, don't know what a double sharp looks like (It looks like an X) and don't know where they are supposed to be positioned relative to a note head. So if wading throught the font is too much, do look at the next section. The frist thing that I do is update the Glyph class. You can of course just copy the Glyph code that I wrote and then work on the problem from there if you want an easier homework assignment. 
  
[next: Accid Code](MJ0714.md)