## MidJava 7-12 Music Notes [&LT;](MJ0711.md) [&GT;](MJ0713.md)
# Delete Heads
 
We have not tested the code that we wrote in the previous section. The way we delete Beams is to delete either the first or the last stem of the group and the way that we delete stems is to delete the last head that is on the stem. So it is time to add a reaction to delete a head.

I decided that a S-N retrace would be a good generic delete gesture. We expect it to be used in the following manner to delete all kinds of things. Target the object that you want to delete, click down close to the center of that object, and then draw down and back up. So the hot spot of the gesture is the place that the stroke start.

So let us add a reaction to Heads to allow look for that delete gesture.

### add to Head constructor
```java
    addReaction(new Reaction("S-N"){ // delete head
      public int bid(Gesture g){
        int w2 = W()/2, h = staff.H();
        int x = g.vs.xM(), xHead = x() + w2, dx = Math.abs(x-xHead);
        if(dx > w2){return UC.noBid;}
        int y = g.vs.yL(), yHead =y(), dy = Math.abs(y-yHead);
        if(dy > h){return UC.noBid;}
        return dx+dy;
      }
      public void act(Gesture g){
        Head.this.deleteHead();
      }
    }); 
```

That action routine calls a helper that we haven't written yet, deleteHead

### add to Head
```java
  public void deleteHead(){
    unStem(); // remove head from stem which could delete stem
    deleteMass(); // remove from the layers
  }
```

You can test at this point. It should work fine. Well... almost fine. I found a bug.

Test this code on a tall, 3 note stack, with one high note and two low notes that are only a second apart. So the high note will be on the beam end, the lowest note will be on the right side but the second note from the bottom will be on the wrong side. Now delete the lowest note. It will delete just fine, but the lowest note will now be the former second note which is still on the worng side. We forgot that when removing a head from the stem, we change how close the heads are from one another. We need to fix up the unstem function so that it calls the setWrongSides function

### add the else clause to unStem in Head
```java
  public void unStem(){
     if(stem != null){
       stem.heads.remove(this); // remove this head from the stem list.
       if(stem.heads.size() == 0){stem.deleteStem();} else {stem.setWrongSides();}
       stem = null;
       wrongSide = false;
     }
  }
```

That fixed the wrong sides bug. Further testing revealed another bug, a little bit more subtle. It turns out that heads not only live on stems and in the layers but they also live in time groups. Remember those? Time groups were created as a side effect of entering a Head. We kept a list of heads all occuring at the same time so that we could detect attempts to stem them all.

Our deleteHead function as written, removed them from the stem AND also removed the Mass from the layers but FORGOT abut time and left the head still in that list of heads in the time group. If you delete the head, it vanishes from the screen BUT if you then do a stem gesture at they x location where the head USED to be, the head that is no longer in the layers but is still there in the time group, will bid on the stem, wins the bid, generates the stem, BUT that head remains invisible because it is still not in the layers.

I only remembered this other place that we store heads, when I removed all the heads from a chord, went to place a head near by that previous chord and saw the time snapping behavior. Oop! that time group is stil there, should I fix that? I would need to notice that I have removed the last head from the time group, WAIT, I NEVER did remove the head from the time group! BUG!

### add this routine to Time
```java
  public void removeHead(Head h){
    heads.remove(h);
    if(heads.size()==0){ // this time group is now empty so
      h.staff.sys.times.remove(this); // remove it from the system.
    }
  }
```
 
### and then patch deleteHead() in Head to call it
```java
  public void deleteHead(){
    unStem(); // remove head from stem which could delete stem
    time.removeHead(this); // remove head from the time group
    deleteMass(); // remove head from the layers
  }
```

Ah - so nice!

[next: Accidentals](MJ0713.md)
