## MidJava 7-1 Music Notes [&LT;](MJ0606.md) [&GT;](MJ0702.md)

# Glyphs

Before we start in on the classes that will hold all our music notes I want you to install the sinfonia true type font on your system. This is the font that we created at Sunhawk, my music notation company. It will make the music rendering much easier for things like Clef signs and flags and sharps and flats etc. There are of course many elements that are just lines and rectangles just like the staff lines and bar lines and whole rests and half rests that we do NOT keep in the font.

Of course fonts were never designed to hold things like music symbols that were intended to be scattered over the page and written at different sizes so in addition to the true type font, you will also want this helper class called Glyph, which deals with the issues of sizing and locating hot-spots.

## get sinfonia.ttf

The font is located on the same website where you found this book, it is just in a sub-directory so go to:

```text
  http://depts.washington.edu/cprogs/BCS/
```  

Unlike my book which is all beautiful javascript enabled/rendered HTML, the above link just dumps you into the default directory viewer for a subfolder of my website and presumably down near the bottom you will see the file: sinfonia.ttf - just download it and install it. (I think you just double click on a font to install it these days)

## Addenda:
I had a student that had problems getting the font properly installed. On his machine he cured the problem by moving the font from a download directory into a Window/font directory. Certainly if you have problems installing a font, google for the directions on what you need to do to correctly install a font on your system. I have had this font installed on my machine for years and I don't really know how what the rules for installing fonts are for your system. Good Luck!

After you have installed the font, copy this class and install it in your music package.

### add Glyph.java to your music package.
```java
  public class Glyph{
    // Offsets & Scales for Sinfonia True Type Font
    public static String fontName = UC.FontName;
    
    public static Glyph BRACE = new Glyph((char)61473, 16, 0, 4);
    
    public static Glyph CLEF_G = new Glyph((char)61479, 16, -3, 1);
    public static Glyph CLEF_F = new Glyph((char)61480, 16, -3, 4);
    public static Glyph CLEF_C = new Glyph((char)61481, 16, -3, 4);
    public static Glyph CLEF_TAB = new Glyph((char)61581, 10, -1, 1);
    public static Glyph CLEF_G8 = new Glyph((char)61639, 16, -3, 1);
    
    public static Glyph HEAD_HALF = new Glyph((char)61485, 16, 0, 0);
    
    public static Glyph FLAG1D = new Glyph((char)61487, 16, 0, 8);
    public static Glyph FLAG1U = new Glyph((char)61488, 16, 0, 1);
    public static Glyph FLAG2D = new Glyph((char)61489, 16, 0, 8);
    public static Glyph FLAG2U = new Glyph((char)61490, 16, 0, 1);
    public static Glyph FLAG3D = new Glyph((char)61491, 16, 0, 8);
    public static Glyph FLAG3U = new Glyph((char)61492, 16, 0, -1);
    public static Glyph FLAG4D = new Glyph((char)61493, 16, 0, 8);
    public static Glyph FLAG4U = new Glyph((char)61494, 16, 0, -3);
    
    public static Glyph REST_W = new Glyph((char)61499, 16, 0, 6);
    public static Glyph REST_H = new Glyph((char)61499, 16, 0, 7);
    public static Glyph REST_Q = new Glyph((char)61501, 16, 0, 5);
    public static Glyph REST_1F = new Glyph((char)61502, 16, 0, 6);
    public static Glyph REST_2F = new Glyph((char)61503, 16, 0, 6);
    public static Glyph REST_3F = new Glyph((char)61504, 16, 0, 4);
    public static Glyph REST_4F = new Glyph((char)61505, 16, 0, 4);
    
    public static int theSize = -1;
    public static Font theFont;
    
    public char code;
    public double scale, dx, dy;
    
    private Glyph(char code, double scale, double dx, double dy){
      this.code = code;
      this.scale = scale; this.dx = dx; this.dy = dy;
    }
    
    public void showAt(Graphics g, int H, int x, int y){
      int size = (int)scale*H;
      if(size != theSize){
        theFont = new Font(fontName, 0, size);
        theSize = size;
      }
      Font f = g.getFont(); // fetch old font so that we can restore it
      g.setColor(Color.BLACK);
      g.setFont(theFont);
      g.drawString(""+code, x + (int)Math.floor(dx*H), y + (int)Math.floor(dy*H));
      g.setColor(Color.RED);
      g.drawRect(x, y, H, H);
      g.setFont(f); // restore old font
    }
  }
```
 
Now we will hack up AaMusic to draw a single G clef on the page just to see that the font works.

### add paintComponent after Layer.ALL.show
```java
    Glyph.CLEF_G.showAt(g, 8, 100, 100);
```

It should draw a G Clef at the scale size of 8, which you no doubt recognize as the default H value for our Staff. I don't recall what the hot spot for a G Clef is, exactly, but I presume that it is supposed to be the centerline of the 5 line staff.

We could test that out quickly by changing the y value to be based on the PAGE.top value. (Remember, PAGE is null until we draw our first shape so guard the drawing access to PAGE!)

### add to paintComponent
```java
  if(Page.PAGE != null){
    Glyph.CLEF_G.showAt(g, 8, 100, Page.PAGE.yMargin.lo + 4*8);
  }
```

Yes, it looks like the y value is the center line. That is the purpose of the Glyph class, to move us away from the standard BASELINE oriented font layout that is built into fonts and lets us draw our single shapes, like note heads, and sharp signs based on the stafflines where they belong. It also assigns names like, CLEF_G to characters in the font rather than making us remember UNICODE values for these very non-standard shapes.

Let us test another shape. I see HEAD_HALF defined there. Let us draw that on the center line as well a little bit further in x than the G Clef. add the line:

### add after the Clef showAt
```java
  Glyph.HEAD_HALF.showAt(g, 8, 200, Page.PAGE.yMargin.lo + 4*8);
```

Run that. WTF? why did it draw it so high in the sky? We look at the numbers in the Glyph class and see HALF_HEAD was defined at

```java
  public static Glyph HEAD_HALF = new Glyph((char)61485, 16, 0, 0);
```

No other glyph was drawn with a dy of zero. Was this Glyph class ever finished? What a piece of junk! Apparently no one ever tested it to see if it drew half note heads at the proper place. It looks like the head was about an octave higher than it should be so I am going to try shifting it down by 7H, so I will change that line in Glyph to:

### fix line in Glyph
```java
  public static Glyph HEAD_HALF = new Glyph((char)61485, 16, 0, 7);
```

That seems to fix that problem. And next I notice that there is no quarter note head or whole note head defined in Glyph, but come on, they MUST be there in that font. Where do you suppose they could be? In Windows, if I search for "font" I see that in their settings section they have a font preview app. Fire it up, type in sinfonia as the name of the font that you want to look at. Enlarge it so that it is big enough to see, and look, there is a quarter note head, just to the right of the half note head.

Back to the Glyph file and I see that HEAD_HALF is (char)61485 so I would guess that the quarter head is just one more than that so I add this line to Glyph:

### add to Glyph
```java
  public static Glyph HEAD_Q = new Glyph((char)61486, 16, 0, 7);
```

And then I test if I am right by fixing the line in paintComponent to:

### draw Qhead in paintComponent
```java
  Glyph.HEAD_Q.showAt(g, 8, 200, Page.PAGE.margins.top + 4*8);
```

Looks like I found the quarter note head.

What I am trying to point out for you here is that Glyph is a mapping layer to help you display symbols that were defined in the sinfonia.ttf font. 

Any private font like this which was built for an application has the symbols in no particular order, in no particular size, and located at no particular BASELINE. No one tells if what you want is in the font or where it is located. That trashy font viewer that was built into Windows shows me the first few characters in the font. It doesn't even show the whole thing. If you want to know where the characters are and what they look like and where they are located you MUST WRITE SOME CODE to draw characters out to the screen. You must look at where they land and measure how big they are and then YOU must write the actual mapping that you need in your application.

This Glyph class is that mapping layer. It is YOUR code, not mine. It isn't finished. Yes, I put that half head in the wrong place! It isn't right, and it isn't documented! When you want something out of the sinfonia font, YOU grovel around and find it, then put what you need into Glyph. Glyph is not some special magical untouchable code. It is YOUR code from the moment that you copied it and included it in YOUR project, and like ALL code you copy from anywhere on the internet, it is UNTESTED GARGAGE until YOU personally READ it test it. You're lucky I didn't write it full of viruses to TRASH YOUR DISK and STEAL YOUR CREDIT CARD informantion! 

OMG! You did READ all my code, before you RAN it, didn't you? Your are just SO lucky I'm a nice guy!

Anyway, fortunately for you, there is no need to do any bulk testing of all this code and all of the constants that it defined. You will never need a character until the moment that you actually need it. We have just tested 3 of them, the GClef, the Half notehead and the Quarter note head.

IF you want to use someone else's musical font instead of sinfonia, you would have this exact same task ahead of you. You would need to map out the font, find where things are, figure out what size they are, figure out what scale factors and offsets you need to use in order to get the font characters to behave how you want them. There is NO standard for these sorts of private application symbol fonts, which have been certainly been built for Chemistry apps, Math apps, Music apps, Architecture apps etc.
  
As I said before, the sinfonia font is the one that I developed for my music company, Sunhawk, many years ago. It is out in the public domain and you are free to use it as you wish. IF you need a font and there are no publicly available fonts with the symbols you need, there are font editors out there that will let you build fonts and you can build a font just like I built sinfonia years ago.

[Clefs](MJ0702.md)
