## MidJava 7-5 Music Notes [&LT;](MJ0704.md) [&GT;](MJ0706.md)
# Duration

Duration is a class that will be shared by both Stems and Rests. We would like both of those classes to extend Duration, BUT both Stems and Rests MUST be Mass objects, because both of them need to have show routines.

At first glance this seems to be a place where you would like to have multiple inheritance, and Java only permits single inheritance. However the first glance is WRONG. You simply have Mass be the ancestor of Duration and then Stem and Rest both descend from Duration.

We don't however want to have a show routine for a raw duration. What would you show? Until you know whether you are showing a rest or a stem you don't know what to draw. And this is what abstract classes are for, those times when you want to defer a routine to a child/subclass.

### create Duration class
```java
  public abstract class Duration extends Mass{
    public int nFlag = 0, nDot = 0;
    public Duration(){super("NOTE");}
    // this next line NOT needed. It is already abstract from Mass. I is just a reminder of what is missing
    public abstract void show(Graphics g); 
  }  
```

Since this class holds the flags and the dots, we will put the behaviors that we need for changing those values in this class and then both Stems and Rests will share those notions. In the back of my head, I am thinking that I want to use and E-E stroke that crosses a Stem or a Rest, to be the stroke that increases the flag count on that stem. Similarly I will use a W-W stroke to decrease the flag count. Dot, on the other hand are so simple and we never have more than 3, we will simply cycle the dots between 0 and 3. If you dot 3 it goes back to zero.

### add to Duration  
```java
  public void incFlag(){if(nFlag <4){nFlag++;}}
  public void decFlag(){if(nFlag >-2){nFlag--;}}
  public void cycleDot(){nDot++; if(nDot >3){nDot = 0;}} 
```

You will notice that I am going to allow flags to go negative. This has nothing to do with music notation. In music notation you either have flags or you don't. They can't go negative. BUT it is easy from a code standpoint to just let the flag count be zero for a quarter note (because there really are zero flags on a quarter note), then let nFlag be -1 for a half note, and -2 for a whole note. The fact that the code has to shift from drawing actual flags to changing the shape of the note heads is hardly a problem. The code can also easily surpress the actual drawing of a Stem for a whole note, BUT that stem will still there, it can still be dotted AND it can still be upFlagged back into a half note, then a quarter etc. 

[next: Rest](MJ0706.md)