## MidJava 7-11 Music Notes [&LT;](MJ0710.md) [&GT;](MJ0712.md)

# UnSteming Beams - Remove Stem from Beams 

I imagined that this would be a simple task, fixing a few routines to remove heads from stems, if the stem becomes empty, delete the stem. If the stem was required for a beam (i.e. was either the first or the last stem) then delete the beam (because we are not sure how we should fix it up).

What I found was code that curiously did not work as expected. I started debugging. The debugger didn't show me quite the detail that I wanted so I started writing toString methods for all my classes so that they could show me what was going on. The deadline of an approaching class where I was supposed to release this code was looming and still it did not work.

When I finally tracked down what was going on I was SHOCKED! It did not appear to be a bug in my code but rather in the library code for ArrayList. I traced my way down to a single line of code. I have an array list, a Layer, the NOTE layer, that holds Stems and Beams and head. I have a Stem that I know is on that list. list.contains(stem) is true. I print the contents of the list just to be SURE that the stem is on the list. I call list.remove(stem) and then print the contents of the list after the removal. Sure enough it has removed an element. It removed a Beam! It does NOT remove the stem that I told it to remove. WTF?

OK - so now I know WHAT is going wrong, I just don't know WHY. I do have some suspicions and with some more careful reading of the documentation for ArrayLists I verify that what is going wrong is that .equals for the classes that I am passing in is failing - i.e. I can write code and verify that beam.equals(stem) is true. WHY that is, I still do not know, and a part of me does not really care because now that I know what is wrong I can fix it. There is of course another part of me that will continue to probe because without haveing identified WHY I don't know what other bugs are lurking waiting to happen.

I know that this discussion tells you nothing. I haven't shown you the problem. I will do that, but my concern is that since I don't actually KNOW what caused the problem I am not sure that it will fail on your machine the way that it did on mine.

HOWEVER, since this is a mid-level Java course, I do get to use the fact that I tripped over a nasty bug to talk to you about a CLASSIC intermediate level concern for the Java language, and I will do it all here in general terms so that you can understand the problem BEFORE I write the code that seemed to have that problem on my machine.

I learned of this CLASSIC problem years ago when I read the book "Effective Java" by Joshua Bloch. The book is MOST excellent, the best book I have ever read about Java. BUT it is not really a book for beginners. Fortunately you are not ALL beginners so I can recommend the book. The primary advantage of the book is that Joshua Bloch was one of the guys at Sun that WROTE all the Collections code in the Java Library so when he tells you HOW it WORKS, he KNOWS!

It is entirely possible that you have heard the comment in one of your Java courses, "If you ever override equals you must also override hashcode if you want Maps to work correctly." What we are dealing with is connected to that advice. You were also told that, "When you are comparing two strings you need to use .equals and not ==". So here is the skinny on that.

The expression == is very primitive, by design. When used between two objects its meaning is, "are the two pointers to these two objects the same identical pointer i.e. we are looking at two pointer to the exact same object."

If you write code like this:

   String foo = "Bob"; String bar = "Bob"
   
And then you test if foo == bar you will find that it is TRUE! This is an accident! It is the result of an optimization that the Java compiler did for you without telling you. Furthermore it is an optimization that EVERY java compiler does for you automatically because it is a REQUIREMENT of the java language. When the compiler sees the string constant "Bob" It create a string that holds the exact letters "Bob" and it points foo to that string AND it remembers in local compiler string space that it KNOWS an address for a string with the value "Bob". In the very next line, when it assigns a different variable bar to the string "Bob" the compiler REMEMBERS that it already knows a string with those letters and it sets bar to point to that same string. SO == is true, both foo and bar point to the same string.

However if you write code like this:

  String foo = "Bob"; String bar = "B" + "ob";

The compiler is NOT required to notice that the concatination of two different strings just HAPPENS to match one that it has previously seen. So it is entirely possible that when you test if foo == bar that you will now get false, they are NOT pointing to exactly the same object. They are pointing to two different objects that just happen to hold the same letters. Two different objects that just happen to have the same VALUE. 

So if you want to test whether two different String objects have the same VALUE you must use .equals which does the slow test of comparing every single letter in one string with every single letter in the other string. == is fast test, it just compares two numerical pointers.

The job of the function **equals** is to compare two VALUE objects and see if they have the same VALUE.

I do believe that **equals** is defined in the Object class, and thus every object has a default **equals** method and I also believe that that default method is just defined to be the same as ==. So **equals** and == are actually the same function at the lowest level. Now clearly someone overrode that default **equals** when they built the String class because in the String class they knew that Strings were lists of letters and that they wanted to compare each and every character.

Anytime you create a value class, where you WANT the same sort of behavior that you get out of String, where you want two different physical objects that just happen to hold the same value to be considered identical, you OVERRIDE **equals** and define it the way that you want it to behave.

AND AS SOON AS YOU DO THAT - you must override **hashCode** as well. Why? Because hashing and equality testing are closely connected behaviors and hashing is required for Maps.

To remind you, hashing is just a method for speeding up equality testing. If you take one long string of letters and grind them all up into a single integer value, that is the hash code for that string. Presumably if you grind up a second DIFFERENT long string of letters, you will get a different integer value. This gives you a fast rejection - IF hash(A) is not the same value as hash(B) then it is impossible that A == B. IF the hashes match, well, they might be different or they might be the same. Equal strings MUST hash to the same value, unequal string MIGHT hash to the same value.

The default verions of hashCode(Object o), way back in the Object class, just returns an integer that is essentially a pointer to the Object o. This hash method is CONSISTENT with the default definition of equals. Two pointers that are identical are declared to be equal and sho nuff the hash codes are identical if the pointers are identical.

When you change definition of **equals** to something that involves looking at every single character in the string, then your hash code needs to respect that. Just returning pointers will take two different object with the same value and return different hashes because the pointers are different. If you want a HashMap<String, SomeClass> to return the same identical SomeClass regardless of whether you look up map.get("Bob") or map.get("B"+"ob") then **hashCode** for String MUST be consistent with **equals** for String. 

This is the reason for the advice that "if you override equals then remember to also override hashCode"  

Now I am ready to get down to some of the details of the problem that I was having and that you MAY have on your machine as well (then again you may not). We had a routine in Mass to deleteMass from the layers.

### old deleteMass code
```java
  public void deleteMass(){
    clearAll(); // remove all the reactions for this mass from itself and from the Reactions byShape list
    layer.remove(this);
  }
```

My problem was that the remove(this) line was failing.

So I modified this routine to call layer.removeItem(this) and went and implemented removeItem in the layer class where I put in lots of debugging statements surrounding the actual removal from the list.

### add to Layer
```java
  public void removeItem(I.Show item){
    ..System.out.println("removing: "+item); // you must implement toString for heads and stems and beams
    ..System.out.println("Before removing: " + this); // you must implement to Sting in Layer to show all items
    remove(item);
    ..System.out.println("After removing: " + this); // you must implement to Sting in Layer to show all items
  }
```

When I ran the system and deleted a Stem, I had the bad behavior that it instead deleted a Beam.

I tested if the list .contains(item), and yes, it did contain the item. I used indexOf(item) and it would return the index of a Beam instead of the indes of a Stem. I tried to locate the item myself using a loop

  int foundAt = -1;
  for(int i = 0; i<this.size(); i++){if(get(i) == item){foundAt = i;}}
  
And that worked! **foundAt** was set to the correct index, the index of the Stem that I was trying to delete instead of the Beam.

I looked again at the documentation for ArrayList and YES, Array list does NOT use ==, instead it uses **equals** to locate elements, both for indexOf and for remove. So my problem was with equals. I tested that by adding the lines
  int k = indexOf(item);
  if(k>=0 && foundAt>=0){System.out.println("item:" + item + " indexOf" + get(k) +" equals" + item.equals(get(k)));}

Indeed - it told me that the  stem.equals(beam)! There is something wrong with equals in the my Mass class.

Oh yes, by the way, before I did any more exploring trying to track down the problem, I developed the work around. Since foundIt WAS finding the thing that I wanted to delete, I just stuffed in the line

```java
  if(foundIt >= 0){remove(foundIt);}
```

and that fixed my problem.

Reading up on ArrayList&lt;Foo&gt;, I saw that ArrayList depends on how **equals** is implemented in the Foo class since that is what we are comparing, and of course here, in Layers, I am comparing things that are of type I.Show. All that they have in common is that they match an interface. I would think that as a result they should fall back to the Object definition of **equals**, but maybe not. Maybe there is some other **equals** that they are finding that is failing.

I got to wondering if perhaps, by declaring both Stems and Heads as implementing Comparable that there was something that was screwing up **equals**. So I modified both my Stem and my Head class to use Comparator, where you explicitly pass an comparator into the Collections.sort routine instead of modifying either the Head class or the Stem class. The problem persisted. I was still printing my error messages.

I printed out the hashCode for the two items, the Beam and the Stem, that it was declaring were equal and their hashCodes were both 1. Now THAT does not look like a decent hashCode to me! A random number between 1 and 4 billion just HAPPENS to be 1? The chances of that are just about, let's see, one in four billion! NOW I KNOW for a fact that NOWHERE in my code have I overridden hashCode, have I? So WHY is is broke? I don't know. BUT let me go fix **equals** and **hashCode** directly in the Mass class and see if that doesn't get rid of my error messages.

### add to Mass
```java
  private int hashCode = G.rnd(100000000);
  public boolean equals(Object o){return this == o;} // set equals back to default as it should be
  public int hashCode(){return hashCode;} // nice and bogus, just like returning a pointer, consistent with ==
```

And my error messages when deleting Stems from layers goes away.

So I have considered boiling this code down to a minimal example that exhibits the problem and posting it to StackOverflow to see if "real programmer" can tell me what is wrong. Remember, I am not a "real programmer" any more. I am a teacher. I don't write code 10 hours a day and talk with other programmers daily. I will admit that my first thought, when I tripped over my mistake, (not when I tripped over the bug mind you but when I realized that my problem was with equals) was: "Why am I wasting my time teaching noobs how to program? If I spent ALL my time doing NOTHING by PROGRAMMING I just might REMEMBER how to do it and not have to continually look this stuff up!". 

But I have calmed down since then. I have little doubt that if I boiled this down, trying to find a test case that I could post to StackOverflos which does the wrong thing and does NOT involve over a thousand lines of code, I would discover what I did that caused the problem, and would just end up smacking my head again and wondering why I am so STUPID! I don't need that. I am FAR better off, and you will be too if you heed my advice, "NEVER forget, ALL your tools, the java language, the compiler, the library, the IDE you develop in, your debugger, your operating system, your file system, the graphics subsystem that draws lines on the screen - is ALL CODE - it was all built by Humans and it is FULL of bugs!" Every once in a while, you trip over a bug in some other piece of code that you DEPEND upon. So discover what the problem is and then WORK AROUND IT! Where did that bogus hashCode routine come from. I don't know and I don't care. 

As a noob - you are CONTINUALLY confronted with the FACT that ALL the mistakes that you ever see are your own fault. They are all mistakes that YOU have made. You didn't understand what you were doing. You didn't understand your tools. You just made a mistake. You learn that ALL bugs are your own. As you become a more seasoned programmer, you  DO make fewer mistakes, but still ALL the mistakes that you see are your own.

Well that is NOT the truth. The truth is that NEARLY ALL the mistakes that you will ever see are your own fault - BUT NOT ALL! As you work with more and more code, more and more machines, at some point, there will be bugs  created by other humans that are outside of your scope, which you DO NOT and CAN NOT understand. You are NOT only responsible for fixing all your own bugs, you are also responsible for noticing bugs that are not your own and working around those as well.

And now with that RANT out of my system. Let us write some code to properly remove stems and beams. 
 
First of all, let me further isolate us from problems that may be caused by our multi-threaded Swing code looking at partially formed structures, because as we start deleting heads from stems and start deleting stems from beams we COULD get mal-formed structures.

### modify x(), yFirstHead(), and yBeamEnd in Stem
```java
  public int x(){
    if(heads.size()==0){return 100;} // guard empty stems
    Head h = firstHead();return h.time.x + (isUp ? h.W() : 0);
  }
  
  public int yBeamEnd(){
    if(heads.size() == 0){return 100;}// gauard empty stems
    ...
  
  public int yFirstHead(){
    if(heads.size()==0){return 200;} // gauard empty stems
    ...
```

I have just returned bogus coordinates for x values and y values if the stem is maleformed. I SHOULD have done this earlier. Guess what happens if you have some bad stem that did NOT get properly deleted and it is still hanging around in the layers but it has no heads on it. Guess what happens if you have a beam that didn't properly get rid of a stem - you see everything drawing suddenly at a single fixed point on the screen. You are better off if a genuinly maleformed structure DOES draw something on the screen so that you can SEE that it isn't constructed correctly.

Next we fix a bug in our single stem crossing reaction for adding and removing flags. We wrote that code back when time.x was the location of a stem. Now stems have a proper .x() function so call that instead.

In MY codebase, this next change goes into a routine bidLineCrossesStem() that I put in my Stem class to combine the bid routines for both E-E and W-W strokes used to define Beams. In YOUR codebase this might be changes to those two reactions. 

### modify Stem reaction: E-E | W-W crossing stem
```java
  int xS = Stem.this.x();
```

### Use Wierd color on Heads with null stems
```java
  g.setColor(stem == null ? Color.RED : Color.BLACK); 
```
make sure that we can unStem a head in Head class (you should have this already)

```java
  public void unStem(){
    if(stem != null){
      stem.heads.remove(this); // get out of old stem
      if(stem.heads.size() == 0){stem.deleteStem();}
      stem = null;
      wrongSide = false;
    }
  } 
```

fix up deleteStem in Stem to deal with deletion of a beamed stem
```java
  public void deleteStem(){// only call if heads is empty
    if(heads.size() != 0){System.out.println("wtf? - deleting stem that had heads on it");}
    staff.sys.stems.remove(this); // get out of the sys list
    if(beam != null){beam.removeStem(this);} // tell the beam that you are leaving
    this.deleteMass();
  }   
```

### add removeStem() to Beam class
```java
  public void removeStem(Stem s){
    if(s == first() || s == last()){deleteBeam();} else {stems.remove(s); stems.sort();}
  }
```

I have decided that we don't want to deal with fixing up a beam that has lost one of its supporting stems so if the stem that is going away was either the first or the last, we will just delete the entire beam.

### add deleteBeam to Beam class
```java
  public void deleteBeam(){
    for(Stem s : stems){s.beam = null;} // remove stem associations with beam.
    // stems still exist, flags and dots still exist, we just remove the beams from those stems.
    deleteMass(); // remove beam from layers
  }
```

[next: Delete Heads](MJ0712.md)
