## MidJava 7-8 Music Notes [&LT;](MJ0707.md) [&GT;](MJ0709.md)
# Head Dots 
## Day 14 

In some ways this section of the book on "head dots" is a stub. We certainly DO want to put dots on heads BUT we don't want to take the time right now to do the right thing. The right thing unfortunately can't be done correctly until we have delt with beams and flags. Flags on upStem notes happen to hang right in the way of where you would normally place dots. Also, placing dots on heads is harder than placing dots on rests. The reason is that rests are always drawn on lines, whereas heads are drawn on either lines or spaces.

The actual rules for placing dots on heads are that you put the dots in the center of the nearest space to the head. So heads that are actually on spaces have the dots immediately after them, whereas heads on lines have the dots either slightly above or slightly below the line that the head is on. When you have notes that are only a second apart, on an adjacent line and space, you need to choose the proper space for the dot that goes with the head on the line so that it doesn't collide with the dot on the head that was on the space. Once again you will have to look at neighbors to decide the correct space to add the dots.

As I said, I don't want to write the code now, just telling you the rules so that you can let them soak in.

However, we can and will STUB the dot code fairly easily. We do have code that draws dots in the Rest show routine that we can copy and paste into the Head show routine. Indeed, it does not follow the rules and the dots do not show in quite the right place BUT, hey, it does show dots and reminds us that of some of the code that we will need to fix up later. And we CAN write the proper reaction to dot our heads now before we ever get to beams and flags.

### add to Head show routine
```java
  if(stem != null){
    int off = UC.restAugDotOffset, sp = UC.augDotSpacing;
    for(int i = 0; i < stem.nDot; i++) {
      g.fillOval(time.x + off + i*sp, y() - 3*H/2, H*2/3, H*2/3);
    }
  }
```

### add reaction to Head
```java
  addReaction(new Reaction("DOT"){
    public int bid(Gesture g){
      int xh = Head.this.x(), yh = Head.this.y(), h = Head.this.staff.H(), w = Head.this.W();
      int x = g.vs.xM(), y = g.vs.yM();
      if(x<xh || x > xh + 2*w || y<yh-h || y>yh+h){return UC.noBid;}
      return Math.abs(xh+w-x)+Math.abs(yh-y);
    }
    public void act(Gesture g){if(Head.this.stem != null){Head.this.stem.cycleDot();}}
  });
```

Joe Bob says, "Check it out!"

[next: Flags](MJ0709.md)
