## MidJava 7-7 Music Notes [&LT;](MJ0706.md) [&GT;](MJ0708.md)
# Stems
## Day 13

From a graphical standpoint stems on heads are very simple, just a vertical line, all you need is 3 numbers, x,y1,y2. However there are a surprising number of rules that you need to follow in order to calculate those 3 numbers. Also, the stem itself influences that layout of the notes that are on that stem, so that layout implications extend beyond the stem itself. There is very little to do but to start describing all those music layout rules and let the code happen as it must.

## First a Minor fix:
## Head Width
Before I start telling you the rules there is a measurement that we need to make. Stems attach either to the left hand side or to the right hand side of a note head. Since those note heads are scaled to a size of H, i.e. they are 2*H vertically, however we need to know how wide those glyphs are. I believe that they are approximately 3*H wide, but to be sure, we should try to put a box around a note head AS IT IS DRAWN BY OUR Glyph class and see if we actually know where the edges are. 

Put this little bit of code at the end of paintComponent to draw a note head and then a bounding box. I introduced a variable, H, so that I could draw a BIG note head, larger than I would ever draw on an actual page so that I could find a multiplier that was close enough for me to draw Stems that connect to our heads. I found that 3*H was too big, 24/10 = 2.4 is actually a closer fit for our font. 

### add to the end of paintComponent
```java
    if(Page.PAGE != null){
      int H = 32;
      Glyph.HEAD_Q.showAt(g, H, 200, Page.PAGE.yMargin.lo + 4*H);
      g.setColor(Color.RED);
      g.drawRect(200, Page.PAGE.yMargin.lo + 3*H, 24*H/10, 2*H);
    }
```

So we will need this multiplicative factor when ever we want to get something to line up exactly with our note heads. i.e. if we draw a note at x,y - y is the center of the head so the top of the head is at y-H, the left hand side is at x and the right hand side is at x + 24*H/10.

Where should those multiplicative factors go? Sure, we could/should put them in the UC class with all our other constants BUT in some sense, it is our Head class that decided to use the sinfonia font and the Head class is where ANY chunk of code ought to go to ask about the location of the right hand edge. The magic scale value H was defined in our Staff class, and Heads were FORCED to use that value to scale their height so that they fit in the staff lines. Once a head has scaled itself to the proper height, it is the job of the head class to let anyone know where the right hand side is.

We will just live with the fact that the Glyph class draws the characters from the left hand side. This is the traditional way that ALL text characters are drawn, you give an x value that is the starting point and draw from left to right. It is a very natural way to think of characters. It is also the way that all rectangles are drawn, you start with a left hand coordinate and add a width to the right. For the duration of this course we will only be using staffs that all share an H value, so all our staffs are the same size and all our notes are the same size so if we align notes on an x value they will all show up properly vertically aligned. IF we want to vertically align DIFFERENT sized note heads so that their centers align we would need to do some more calculation. We will not worry about that.

What I am trying to do in this discussion is to FIX in your head (and mine!) the grahpical choices that we are making. When I talk about the x and y location of a note, the x value is the LEFT hand side and the y is the location of the CENTER. We will build a helper that will help us calculate the RIGHT hand side.

### add to Head class
```java
   public int W(){return 24*staff.H()/10;} // Width of a note head, RIGHT = LEFT + W();
```

## Stem Layout Rules
So let us start enumerating rules that have something to do with stem layout.

## 1) Up stems, Down stems, and default direction.
Graphically, an Up stem starts on the right side of a note (the "note" end) and goes upwards to the "beam" end of the note. Down stems start on the left side of a note and go downward to the beam end.

IF you are drawing a SINGLE voice on a SINGLE staff, the DEFAULT stem direction is to point toward the center line of the staff - high pitched notes would have down stems and low pitched notes would have up stems, notes ON the center line could go either direction though generally one single direction is selected.

However IF you have TWO voices on a SINGLE staff, for example both the Soprano and the Alto voice in the top staff of a Hymn arrangement, the direction of the stem MAY be used to indicate which voice the note belongs to.

Now NONE of this matters in our music notation system - we are allowing our user, our composer, to draw the stems and they can follow what ever pattern they want.

I am calling this to your attention because I have made a USER INTERFACE choice for you. I decided that instead of having the application automatically draw all the stem lines for you (thus matching standard single voice behavior) I will REQUIRE the user to enter all the stems. That way it is clear to the user that they have complete control over the stem direction - there ARE NO stem directions until they choose them. This choice is NOT the choice that is typically made in most music notation software programs. They are not comfortable with having the music in some partial incomplete state. They know that notes have heads and stems and so they FORCE the existance of a stem, and if it is in the wrong direction, well the user can fix it. WE on the other hand, are DRAWING music. It does not bother us in the least that createing a note, which required both a head and a stem required the user to DRAW a head and then DRAW a stem, but that was a user interface CHOICE. We could have easily done the same thing that standard music notation software does, put a stem with the default direction immediately on the head at the moment that it was drawn, and require the user to change that if it was NOT what they wanted. 

## 2) default stem length = one octave

In our system one octave is 7*H. So if a note is on line 0, the down stem should end on line 7. Now this is the default for a stem with ONE single head on it. IF the stem has several heads, what you really want to do is find the note that is Farthest from the "note" end of the stem, i.e. the note that is Closest to the "beam" end of the stem and add 7*H to that notes line. (You add 7 for down Stems you subtract 7 for up Stems).

Basically you want 7*H of blank stem on which to add flags and beams.

## 3) default length only valid if flag count &LT; 3

Normally flags (and beams) are 1*H thick, and you leave a 1*H gap between each pair of flags or beams. So that 7*H empty space on the stem gave you enough room to attach 2 flags (which occupy the last 3*H of the beam end). However, if you want 3 flags on the end, you must add 2*H to the length (so that you have room for the 1 extra flag and the 1 extra gap that you need. Each extra flag that you want to add over 2 requires that you ADD 2 more H to the lenght of the stem. So a stem with 2 flags is 7*H from the end of the last head, a stem with 3 flags is 9*H, a stem with 4 flags is 11*H, and so on.

## 4) Stem should reach center line 

in any case, IF your stem CAN cross the mid line of the staff that it is on THEN it MUST cross or reach the mid line.

Wait, What? If you have a very high pitched note, i.e. one written several ledger lines above the very top line AND that note has a down stem (which is the normal direction to draw the stem) then that line is heading down toward the center line and COULD have crossed the mid line if it was only long enough. Well, then you must stretch that line so that it DOES reach the mid line.

Basically, in single voice music where all stems point toward the mid line, all stems MUST reach the mid line. If you are doing two voice per staff and if you are following the convention that stem directions indicate the voice, the high soprano notes will have upward pointing stems and the low alto notes will have downward pointing stems and those stems are probably all pointing away from the mid line. In that case you don't do any extra stretching. You just size the lines to their default octave length plus whatever extra they need to accomodate the flags that they have on them.

Those are the basic rules for how the stem itself is drawn. Next, there are rules for how to draw the note heads that land on the stem.

## Rules for Heads on Stems
The note heads on an up stem are generally drawn on the left hand side of that up stem (or equivalently - the stem is drawn to the right of the notes) HOWEVER there is an important exception. IF two notes are on adjacent lines (and here I am talking about our "line coordinates" so adjacent lines means that visually one note is on a staff line and the other note is on a space between that staff line its neighbor) then the notes would actually overlap so one of them is "displaced" to the "wrong" side of the stem. The musical term for notes that are on adjacent lines is "notes that are one second apart" (the word "second" does not refer to TIME it refers to a PITCH difference) - so this layout rule is how to deal with "seconds".

## 5) Seconds 
if two notes are one second apart, one of them must be drawn on the wrong side of the stem.

I made it sound as if you are perfectly free to choose which note goes on the wrong side. You are almost free to do so, there is an additional rule though...

## 6) first head is on correct side

that first note on a stem, i.e. the one farthest from the beam, MUST be on the correct side of the stem.

So the real rules is draw the "first note" on the corrext side of the stem, and then moving toward the beam end of the stem try to draw EVERY note on the correct side of the stem and ONLY use the wrong side of the stem if you were FORCED to do so because you were only a second away from the previous note.

Since that rule is all about knowing who your neighbors are on the stem, you can probably guess that we will want to keep the notes in sorted order on the list of heads in the Stem class. This means that we will need to make sure that the list gets resorted every time we add or remove heads from a stems head list.

Anyway, that's enough rules for now. There are others, differences brought on by beams and dots and we will deal with those later.

Wow, too much documentation and not enough code, eh. Let's write some code. Stems, just like Rests, should descend from the Duration class

## Outline of Stem class
```java
  public class Stem extends Duration{
    public Staff staff;
    public Head.List heads = new Head.List();
    public boolean isUp = true;
    
    public Stem(Staff staff, boolean up){
      super();
      this.staff = staff;
      isUp = up;
      // reactions will go here
    }
  }
```

We need lists of heads
### add to Head
```java
  //----------------HEAD LIST---------------------
  public static class List extends ArrayList<Head>{}
```

And of course we need a show routine in Stem to draw our stems. In outline, it looks somewhat like this:
### add to Stem class
```java
  public void show(Graphics g){
    if(nFlag >= -1){
      int x = x(), h = staff.H(), yH = yFirstHead(), yB = yBeamEnd();
      g.drawLine(x,yH,x,yB);
    }
  }
```

We have defered our actual calculations to 3 helper functions, x(), yFirstHead(), and yBeamEnd(). And I will show you those in just a minute BUT I will warn you that I ran into a bug when I wrote show() code like this, and it was not immediately obvious what the problem was. 

## A Strange Bug
I warned you about this bug in an earlier section and said that it almost NEVER happened so we could ignore it, and then, just to prove me wrong, it happened almost immediately! So here is the story, once again and our fix.

I once got an index out of bounds exception. It happened when I evaluated yFirstHead. My problem was that there were no heads on my stem, so the obvious and simple code that attempted to grab that first head was failing. WTF? Why am I ever creating stems with no heads? The only reason at ALL to have a stem is to hold heads. I went groveling over my code (which I have not shown you yet) looking for where I made the mistake of creating a stem with NO heads on it.

I could find no such problem and then I remembered the multi-threading bug, I am running swing on two threads. 

AH HA! 

When I call a Stem constructor, it creates a stem and it does all the bookkeeping of adding it to the layers and all that Mass stuff in the call to super() BEFORE it ever gets to the code that joins that first head to the stem. The paint procedure that is calling show, is however running on a second thread. My window may get asked to repaint itself at ANY time, when the user jiggled the window or something else happended on the screen. Repaint can happen at ANY time, including a tiny slice of time that was AFTER I had inserted a Stem into the Layers but BEFORE I had added heads to that class.

So I modified my guard in my show routine to look like this:
### add guard in Stem.show()
```java
  if(nFlag >= 1 && heads.size()>0) {...}
```

It just LOOKS so wrong. Why am I drawing a stem that is only partially completed and has no heads yet? Won't that mess up the graphics if I draw things that aren't finished? No it won't. 

Yes, the code that ran through the show process may have "shown" the wrong things over in the paint thread, BUT it was probably NOT drawing directly to the screen. It was probably drawing to an in memory bitmap buffer so that it could present the finished image all at once. At the same time, our other thread that is constructing all our objects, will finally finish the actual correct construction of a new stem, or anything else that we are building, and our "construction thread" call "repaint()". That was our signal to the "Painting thread" that whatever it was drawing is now garbage and it must start over. That is what "repaint" means. Repaint is NOT a function that paints the screen, repaint is a function that sets a message for a paint thread which will asynchronously see that message and start its painting process over.

I am passing on this reminder to you of one of the little gotchas that can always happen in multi-threaded applications.

Notice that the guard which we required is NOT difficult. I am just preventing myself from running code in a show routine that could throw an array index out of bounds exception in one of my show routines. 

For this bug I am NOT following my customary course style here when writing this up. My customary style is to write code exactly the way that I write it, and IF there is a bug, I will walk you right into it. I let you see the bug, and then I will explain the bug and tell you how to fix it. The reason I am dievating is that THIS bug is one of those evil intermittant ones - One that runs fine for days, weeks, months, and just occasionally happens when the timing is just right. 

Feel free to leave that second half of the guard out and see if you don't have the same occasional intermittant problems that I had. This sort of bug, one that shows up sometimes maybe only rarely are generally VERY hard to track down because it is very hard to MAKE the bug happen when you want it.

And now that I have warned you about this for a second time, I will not in the future describe in any great detail WHY there is occasionally a strange looking guard in some of my show routines. 

## First and Last Heads
Now let's get back to those helper routines. I have made the assumption that we will sort the heads on a stem in ascending order by line number. This means that for a down stem, the first head is at zero but for an up stem zero will be the lastHead (the one closest to the beam end). We will need to be sure that we sort the heads in that order.

### add to Stem class - Helpers for x, y1, y2
```java
  public Head firstHead(){return heads.get(isUp ? heads.size() - 1 : 0);}
  public Head lastHead(){return  heads.get(isUp ? 0 : heads.size() - 1);}
  public int yFirstHead(){Head h = firstHead(); return h.staff.yLine(h.line);}
  
  public int yBeamEnd(){
    Head h = lastHead();
    int line = h.line;
    line += (isUp? -7:7); // default is one octave from last head on the beam
    int flagInc = nFlag > 2 ? 2*(nFlag-2) :0; // if more than 2 flags we adjust stem end..
    line += (isUp? -flagInc : flagInc); // .. but direction of adjustment depends on up or down stem
    if((isUp && line > 4) || (!isUp && line < 4)){line = 4;} // meet center line if we must
    return h.staff.yLine(line);
  }
  public int x(){Head h = firstHead(); return h.time.x + (isUp?h.W():0);}
```

## Heads using Stems
Looking just a bit down the road, when we start drawing several heads that all share the same time, and are stacked up waiting for you to draw the S-S stroke that will be the stem for several of those heads, that reaction will be won by a single head. However the result, adding a stem, will apply to many heads all at once. It will be convenient to have a list of heads that we can go through to see which ones were actually affected by that down stroke. This suggests that we will want times to have a member that will hold that list of heads.

### add to Time
```java
  public Head.List heads = new Head.List();
```

When we create heads, they will join a time group and will need to add themsleves to this list. Furthermore, it means that when we finally get around to deleting heads, we will need to remember to remove them from this time list. I don't want to think through head deletion which will also involve removing and disabling reactions and getting off of their stems as well BUT in order to remember the time connection, when we add the code to the constructor, I will also add a delete() function, that will be commented to be a STUB - telling me that it is incomplete BUT it will remind me to remove heads from the time list.

Next we will need to upgrade the Head class so that Heads have a member stem. I have also put in some other members that we will eventually use. One of them is the wrongSide boolean that we will need for displacing heads on the stem. Given that a head will eventually be displaced, we will NOT be able to just use time.x to tell where the head goes, instead we will need a helper function x() that will used time.x AND the wrongSide information to calculate the actual x value for a head. 

I also put in a Glyph variable, forcedGlyph, which will almost always be null, representing the fact for nearly all music the glyph on the end of the stem is NOT forced to be a single special glyph, instead, the normal Glyph will be either a quarter, or a half, or a whole note head and can be determined entirely by the flag count. However if someone sets the forced glyph, then that is the glyph that we will use.

(just for the record, this forced glyph is necessary for an obscure violin specific notation known as a "bowed tremolo". We will not be implementing that in this course, but we can leave a space for that later addition in our design now. It will also allow an obscure notation known as "shaped notes")

### Head Class upgraded
```java
  public static class Head extends Mass{
  public Staff staff;
  public int line; 
  public Time time; // .. so heads, in order to have x, have a time.
  public Glyph forcedGlyph = null; // null means use the normal Glyph calculated from the flag count
  public Stem stem = null; // heads are created with no stem so the user can choose direction..
  public boolean wrongSide = false; // normally a head is NOT on the wrong side
  
  public Head(Staff staff, int x, int y){
    super("NOTE");
    this.staff = staff;
    this.line = staff.lineOfY(y);
    time = staff.sys.getTime(x); // get the time for this head.
    time.heads.add(this);
  }
  
  public void show(Graphics g){
    int H = staff.H();
    (forcedGlyph != null ? forcedGlyph : normalGlyph()).showAt(g, H, x(), y());
  }
    
  public int y(){return staff.yLine(line);}
  public int x(){return time.x;}                    // ..STUB..
  public Glyph normalGlyph(){return Glyph.HEAD_Q;}  // ..STUB.. 
  public void delete(){time.heads.remove(this);}    // ..STUB..
```

## Reactions to put heads on stems
We will use a single S-S stroke for all of our grouping and ungrouping of heads on stems. If you do a S-S stroke just to the right or just to the left of a note head, you want to either group or unGroup that head with a stem.

This will be our first reaction where the action needs to affect several objects, in this case several heads, insted of ONLY the head that won the bid. The fact is all the heads that you sweep past will bid for that stroke and will in fact probably bid the same amount, so it is a little random as to which one actually wins the bid, but that won't matter. The winning head will provide us with a time and the gesture will provide a y1,y2 range. We will go through all those heads at that time and in that range and either ungroup them or group them.

Let us first write the helper functions that do the grouping and ungrouping and then write the reaction that will call those functions. Since these functions need access to all the heads in a single system that occur at a specific time stemHeads() and unStemHeads will be a functions performed by a Time

### add to the Time class
```java
  public void unStemHeads(int y1, int y2){
    for(Head h: heads){
      int y = h.y();
      if(y>y1 && y<y2){h.unStem();}
    }
  }
```

This made use of a function that we have not yet written in the Head class to remove a head from its stem

### add to Head class
```java
    public void unStem(){
      if(stem != null){  // no need to unStem a head that is already unStemed
        stem.heads.remove(this); // get out of old stem
        if(stem.heads.size() == 0){stem.deleteStem();} // old stem vasishes if it becomes empty
        stem = null; // this head now has no stem
        wrongSide = false; // so can't possibly be on the wrong side
      }
    }
```

And unStemming a head migh make the stem go empty in which case we need to delete the stem. The is a delete function that all Masses implement to remove them from the layers. That is probably all that we need to do, but on the off chance that there is some other clean up that we might want, I am going to write a "wrapper" for the Mass delete in the Stem class. 

I don't honestly know at this point if I need this wrapper. In the back of my head I am thinking that I might want to delete an entire stem and all the heads that are on it, in which case I will need to go through the head list and clean it out and delete all of them. This next routine is where I would insert that logic IF I ever decide that I want to delete a stem that was NOT already empty. Fpr right now, though, the heads list is empty and I can just delete the stem.     

### add to Stem class
```java
  public void deleteStem(){delete();} // only call if list of heads is empty
```

Next we need to go the other direction, building the function that puts all the crossed heads onto a single stem.

### add to Time class
```java
  public void stemHeads(Staff staff, boolean up, int y1, int y2){
    Stem s = new Stem(staff, up); // first create the new stem
    for(Head h: heads){
      int y = h.y();
      if(y>y1 && y<y2){h.joinStem(s);}
    }
    if(s.heads.size() == 0){
      System.out.println("WTF? - empty head list after stemming");
    }else{
      s.setWrongSides();
    }
  }
```  

### Stub setWrongSides() in Stem  
```java
  public void setWrongSides(){/*..STUB..*/}
```

This routine creates the stem and then goes through all the heads on the time list checking if they are at ther right values to be joining the new stem. We chain down to a Head function that we haven't written yet that moves the head from whatever stem it was on over to the new stem. After the for loop we need to sort this new list of heads and then go though that list in order to place all the heads either on the right side or the wrong side. Please stub that setWrongSides function in the Stem clas now. We need to call that function here, but the function can just return without either sorting or setting wrongSide until we are ready to deal with the layout of seconds.

That guard that you see there, I don't believe that it is necessary. I put it there when I was debugging my multi-threaded show routine problem. I had a stem with no heads on it - IMPOSSIBLE! I was trying to track down whether I had a mistake in the gesture/logic that was adding heads to stems. This error message NEVER happend because of course my empty stem was caused by painting at a bad time rather than because I was constructing bad stems. None the less, it doesn't hurt to leave the error message in the code. If it trips, then some other bug is happening.

### add to Head class
```java
  public void joinStem(Stem s){
    if(stem != null){unStem();} // make sure that this head is NOT on some other stem..
    s.heads.add(this); // ..before it joins the Stem's heads list
    stem = s; // reference your stem - this head now has a stem.
  } 
```

### add to Stem class
```java
  public void deleteStem(){delete();} // this deletes the stem from the layers.
```

You know, to be honest, we NEVER should have named that function in Mass "delete". It means that someone higher up in the object hierarchy, like a stem, will have a function named "delete" and you MIGHT make the mistake of thinking that it properly deletes a stem, removing heads and whatever else it should do. If we had given it a name like "deleteMass" then we would know what level of delete we were doing. So let us fix that name, and also fix the deleteStem function that we just wrote in Stem that was calling delete() when it wanted to deleteMass().

### change delete() in class Mass to be deleteMass()

### in Stem update deleteStem
```java
  public void deleteStem(){deleteMass();} // only call if list of heads is empty
```

(And technically when I tried to build this, there was a second place where I had called delete() when I meant deleteMass() and that was in the sandbox ReactionTest - I fixed that as well - I should have done a refactor to Safely change the name instead of just typing it it!)

Anyway, with these joinStem and unStem helpers in place, we can finally write a reaction. As I said earlier, many heads (all the ones that you crossed) will want to bid on this stroke. Only one will win. Which one, we don't know. We will treat that one as special. We will use the winner's time, (which is no big deal, because presumably the only heads bidding on this gesture all share the same time), BUT we will also use the winner's state, currently stemmed or currently unstemmed, to decide whether this was a stemHeads or an unStem heads action.

### add reaction to Head
```java
  addReaction(new Reaction("S-S"){ // Stem or unStem heads
    public int bid(Gesture g){
      int x = g.vs.xM(), y1 = g.vs.yL(), y2 = g.vs.yH();
      int W = Head.this.W(), hy = Head.this.y();
      if(y1 > y || y2 < y){return UC.noBid;} // heads not in y range reject this gesture
      int hl = Head.this.time.x, hr = hl + W; // left and right side of Head.
      if(x < hl-W || x > hr+W){return UC.noBid;} // must be reasonably close to the head.
      if(x < (hl+W/2)){return hl-x;}
      if(x > (hr-W/2)){return x-hr;}
      return UC.noBid;
    }
    public void act(Gesture g){
      int x = g.vs.xM(), y1 = g.vs.yL(), y2 = g.vs.yH(); // gesture locations
      Staff staff = Head.this.staff; // Head parameters
      Time t = Head.this.time;
      int W = Head.this.W();
      boolean up = x > (t.x+ W/2); // 
      if(Head.this.stem == null){ // winner of bid gets to choose between stem or unStem action
        t.stemHeads(staff, up, y1,y2); // staff and up needed to create the stem
      }else{
        t.unStemHeads(y1,y2);
      }
    }
  });  
```

You should be able at this point to stem and unstem head. Do test several things when you get to this point. See whether the threshold distance that I selected, namely one head's width, W, was close enough for the interaction. Do create some heads on different staff lines and see if you can get some cross staff stemming happening. Do check that you can add two notes to a stem, and then unstem only one of them (which should leave the other still stemmed). I believe that the ORDER in which two heads were entered determines which one wins the bid if the two bids are equal. If I remember the code correctly you have to BEAT a previous winner in order to steal the bid from them. SO you should be able to TEST which head actually wins the bid by having two notes, one stemmed and one not and doing a S-S stroke past both of them.

## Layout of Seconds

We previously stubbed a stem function, setWrongSides() whose job was to first sort all the heads on the stem and then go through them in order and make sure that every head knew which side it is on. We will write that function first and then make sure that our heads actually do start respecting that wrongSide boolean when they draw themselves.

We have not done sorting before in this course, but being intermediate java programmers, I know that you already know the basics of sorting, you just need a quick reminder - same as I do every single time that I need to sort something. I sort things so rarely that I must google for "java sort ArrayList" and get the reminder. You usually get a stackOverflow hit and skip all the noise and look for the example.

The basics are that you take the elements that you want to sort, Foo, and make that class implement Comprable<Foo>, which means that the class Foo now has a compareTo(Foo foo) function. That function allows one Foo object took at a second Foo object and return an int that tells the ordering relationship between those two Foo objects. The existance of that function is what allows Collections.sort(arrayList<Foo>) into the proper order.

### add to the Head class
```java
  public static class Head extends Mass implements Comparable<Head>{
  ...
  public int compareTo(Head h){ // this is the code required for Comparable that makes the sort work.
    return (staff.iStaff != h.staff.iStaff) ? staff.iStaff - h.staff.iStaff : line - h.line;
  }  
```

I decided that I would allow cross staff stemming in the compare routine - this means that I compare notes by line if they are in the same staff When they are NOT in the same staff I compare them by staff.iStaff. The mere fact that I do that in the compare routine does NOT mean that I have made the decision to allow the user to actaully use a single stem for notes in different staffs. I am not sure that my show code would do the proper thing, but my sort routine can at least do the right thing. 

By the way, you almost always implement these compareTo functions by subtracting one number from another. Subtraction gives you the essential Three-Way_Split that all compare functions are looking for, negative, zero, positive corresponding to less than, equal, greater than. I NEVER remember which one you subtract from the other, and I make NO effort to learn. This is NOT because I am untrainable. I COULD learn but IMHO that would be WRONG! IF I learned the proper way to subtract the numbers, I might make the foolish mistake of NOT TESTING whether my sorting was going the right direction, because I THINK that my code was designed correctly. Far better to remain ignorant, to KNOW that I am ignorant, and therfor MUST, at the earliest opportunity, test the sorting and flip the order of negation if I did it wrong. So I don't even look at the order that they do things on the stackOverfow example, I subtract and if the list was ascending rather than descending then I flip the order of the subtraction. 

Anyway, after your Heads know how to compare themselves, the other half of sorting is to call Collections.sort(heads) which will be first line of our setWrongSides() routine

### add to Stem class
```java
  public void setWrongSides(){ // called by Time.stemHeads
    Collections.sort(heads);
    int i, last, next;
    if(isUp){i = heads.size()-1; last = 0; next = -1;} else{i = 0; last = heads.size()-1; next = 1;}
    //ph = Previous Head, nh = Next Head
    Head ph = heads.get(i); ph.wrongSide = false; // first head is always right 
    while(i != last){
      i += next;
      Head nh = heads.get(i);
      nh.wrongSide = (Math.abs(nh.line - ph.line)<=1 && !ph.wrongSide);
      ph = nh;
    }
  }
```

In the above routine I need to traverse those head lists in two different directions, largest to smallest for up stems and from smallest to largest for down stems. So I created 3 variables, !ii - which is the current index, !ilast - which is the last legal index, and !inext - which is the step size that I add to !ii each time through the loop. I then keep track of the previous Head, !iph, which I use in the loop to compare to the next Head, !inh, which came from !ii, when I want to see if !inh and !iph are only one line apart.

In order to test my sorting and my wrong side code, I modified Glyph.showAt so that it no longer set the color to black, which allows me to color heads in different colors. Then I added a color selector when I draw my heads.

### temporarily add to Head show()
```java
  g.setColor(wrongSide?Color.GREEN:Color.BLUE);
  if(stem != null && stem.heads.size() != 0 && this == stem.firstHead()){g.setColor(Color.RED);}
```

And once you have tested sorting fix glyph and head.

Are we ready to draw seconds yet? Not quite, we had these two stubs in the Head class that we need to now write

```java
  public int x(){return time.x;} // STUB
  public Glyph normalGlyph(){return Glyph.HEAD_Q;} // STUB
```

### add to Head class  
```java
  public int x(){
    int res = time.x;
    if(wrongSide){res += (stem!= null && stem.isUp) ? W() : -W();}
    return res;
  }
  
  public Glyph normalGlyph(){
    if(stem == null){return Glyph.HEAD_Q;}
    if(stem.nFlag == -1){return Glyph.HEAD_HALF;}
    if(stem.nFlag == -2){return Glyph.HEAD_W;}
    return Glyph.HEAD_Q;
  }
```

What was that? Your Glyph class didn't define HEAD_W? So whose problem is that? I'll give you a hint, the whole head is just in front of the half head.

At this point you should be able to stem and unstem notes and you should have the proper layout of seconds working as well. 

## Addendum
One of the students discovered a bug (thanks!) in the second layout code caused by cross staff stemming.

If you create a system with two staffs, and you put a note on a line in one staff, and a note on the neighboring space ON THE OTHER STAFF, the second layout code as written (in the setWrongSides() routine in Stem) THINKS that the two notes are right next to each other and decides that they are seconds. We needed a better boolean function to extablish wrong side:

### replace line in Stem setWrongSides()
```java
  nh.wrongSide = ((ph.staff == nh.staff) && Math.abs(nh.line - ph.line) <= 1 && !ph.wrongSide);
```

and that fixes the second layout bug in cross staff stemming.

[next: Head Dots](MJ0708.md)
