## MidJava 7-2 Music Notes [&LT;](MJ0701.md) [&GT;](MJ0703.md)

# Clef
The next thing that we want to do in our music class is to get notes onto those staffs. We will probably need several classes for this next sprint: Head, Stem, Beam, Rest and probably Time, oh and Clef, we GOT to do clefs or it just doesn't look like music. 

There are actually several things that we SHOULD do for Clef involving the way that Clefs propagate through systems. Usually the first thing that the musician sees on EVERY single staff is the Clef defining the pitches for that staff. Usually this is something that would be done in the definition of the system. Piano music is system after system that ALL look the same, one staff with a G clef on top and an F clef down below. No need to make the user enter them every single time the user creates a new system.

On the other hand, the composer is free to change the clef in the middle of the staff if they need to do that, for example if the right hand part of the piano goes so low down that it is easier to notate it in an F-clef. Techinically, if you change a staff in the middle of a staff, you are supposed to echo that changed value on the next system and on the next UNTIL you change it back to its normal state. It is considered WRONG to change a clef at the front of a staff. That very first clef that shows up at the front of a staff is simply a REMINDER of what ever the last clef change was. So you CHANGE clefs in the middle of a staff (or anywhere along that staff including possibly at the end of a staff) and then you ECHO out whatever the last clef change was in the previous staff at the start of the next staff.

Well, I don't want to write all that code (to propagate clef changes)now. I will probably not write that code ever in this course. I will just leave doing it right as an exercise. 

Doing it right means that every actual staff must hold onto a list of all the clef changes that happend over the length of that staff. That clef list must be able to answer the question, "What was the last change before the end of this staff". You would then use that function to either allow a staff to figure out its initialClef by asking the previous staff in the previous system what it's last change was (a 'pull' model) OR on any change of clef (either adding or deleting) you must tell the next staff in the next system what its initial clef should be (a 'push' model). Both models involve code to find the corresponding staff in some adjacent system, the push model runs only on clef changes which is good but requires that every staff hang on to an extra member that is its initial clef, the pull model is bad in that it would need to run every time you paint the screen but saves memory by not requiring a staff to know its clef, it just looks it up from the previous one. The push model is probably the easier method of the two. 

We will do something even simpler, we will just write the reactions (in the Staff class) to set (or change) the initialClef and NOT allow users to change clef in the middle of a staff at all.

In actual handwritten music, clef signs are actually a little tricky to draw correctly, but we will use the compass gestures to our advantage. A stroke that looks like a greater than sign, SE-SW, is actually shaped like the first stroke that you would actually draw if you were drawing that bass clef, the F-Clef. So we will just arbitrarily declare that if you draw SE-SW, starting at the top of a staff and ending at the bottom of a staff you are setting the staff to an F-clef and we will draw the symmetrically opposite compass gesture, SW-SE, to set a staff to be a G-clef.

### Create a Clef class
```java
  public class Clef{
  public Glyph clef;
  public static Clef G = new Clef(Glyph.CLEF_G), F = new Clef(Glyph.CLEF_F);
  
  private Clef(Glyph g){this.clef = g;}
  
  public void showAt(Graphics g, int x, int yTop, int H){
    clef.showAt(g, H, x, yTop + 4*H);
  }
}

--in Staff constructor add:
  addReaction(new Reaction("SE-SW"){ // F-Clef
    public int bid(Gesture g){
      int x = g.vs.xM(), y1 = g.vs.yL(), y2 = g.vs.yH();
      G.LoHi m = Page.PAGE.xMargin;
      if(x < m.lo || x > m.hi){return UC.noBid; }
      int d = Math.abs(y1-Staff.this.yTop()) + Math.abs(y2-Staff.this.yBot());
      return (d > 50) ? UC.noBid : d;
    }
    public void act(Gesture g){initialClef = Clef.F;}
  });
  
  addReaction(new Reaction("SW-SE"){ // G-Clef
    public int bid(Gesture g){
      int x = g.vs.xM(), y1 = g.vs.yL(), y2 = g.vs.yH();
      G.LoHi m = Page.PAGE.xMargin;
      if(x < m.lo || x > m.hi){return UC.noBid; }
      int d = Math.abs(y1-Staff.this.yTop()) + Math.abs(y2-Staff.this.yBot());
      return (d > 50) ? UC.noBid : d;
    }
    public void act(Gesture g){initialClef = Clef.G;}
  });
```

[next: Head](MJ0703.md)