## MidJava 8-1 That's All, Folks! [&LT;](MJ0714.md)

# Summary
## The End?

At this point in my latest run of the class, 2020, we took 20 2 hour sessions to get to this point, and that is enough for now. My students need to study for their finals and we have demonstrated the fundamentals of a gesture based music editor.

There are of course MANY other components to a full featured music notation system. We have not included KeySignatures, Time Signatures, Fermatas, Creshendos, Ties and Slurs, Pedal marks, Bow Marks, Tremolos and Bowed Tremolos, Guitar Tabulature. And those are JUST some of the visible things that we have omitted. In the category of the INVISIBLE we have done virtually none of the editing features: We have no way to open up space to let me insert two new measures between this old music, we have no way to copy and paste, we have no way to tighten or loosen the formatting, we have no way to FLOW music (e.g. put in line breaks, I want to move the measure from the end of this line down to the next. We have not allowed the user to set the margins, we have not defined the length of the page, we do not allow them to save or load a file, we do not allow them to print the music, we do not generate MIDI so that they can hear the music.

In those twenty 2 hour sessions, we have done 40 hours of work, that is one standard work week. Yes, we spent several months, an entire semester, doing that one week of work. Yes I did most of the coding and you just followed along, BUT if the class has worked the way that I intended, you have indeed typed in every single line and have seen how the code works. I expect that if you had to, particularly with access to these notes as a reminder, you could recreate this entire project in a week of work.

That week was a single hike, a day hike if you will, taking us partway up a mountain. A hike is small and a mountain is huge. A full-featured music editor is one week after another for at least a year if not more, BUT the daily work is really not terribly different from what we have been doing all along. 

Pick a feature, "Hey we don't have accidentals on note heads!" Implement it. Write some Glyph code, build a class, a show routine, some reactions, some helpers. Test it all out. 

Oops, our accidentals work fine for regular notes BUT if you have heads on the wrongSide of the stem in a chord, the accidental clashes with the head that is on the right side of the chord right next to it. Do we fix that now or push it off to later? Oh, Let's just push it off. We will need to rewrite all of that accidental code to do the entire accidental stacking thing. 

Better to move on to something messy like copy and paste. Do you think we can select an whole group of notes by drawing one big enormous circular loop around all of the notes? Humm.. the gesture code would try to recognize that as a circle, but that's not enough information... You know this is probably like the special case we did with the dot gesture. If the entire gesture was just a few pixels big it was just a dot. We can do the same thing the other way. If a gesture is HUGE AND you ended up close to where you started, you were probably just circling several note to select them. Yeah, that should work. Let's see, that would be changes to the gesture recognition code. Haven't looked at that in weeks. I wonder if it can still remember how it works.

This is what application development looks like, and that was the primary reason for teaching this particular course, a Mid-Level Java course. A beginning Java course gives you the details of the language, Here is what a class is, here is what a for loop looks like, this is what abstract means, this is static. These are the hammers and saws, the boards and nails, that you need for building anything, but IMHO I don't think it is enough to teach students how to nail boards together and then expect them to be able to build a building. If all you ever see is small weekly assignments you never see the bigger picture.

Learning how to wander over a large code base, making chages here and there, trying to keep it all consistent, and keep it evolving toward some useful product, is THE JOB. 

We wrote about 28 different classes in that one weeks worth of work. That is NOT a big project in any sense of the word, NOT EVEN CLOSE! 

When I left Microsoft in 1995 the Windows Operating System that I had helped start back in 1983, had already grown to some 20 million lines of code. Windows 10 is estimated to have about 50 million lines of code. 

If you think of a novel as about 100 pages (an under estimate), with about 100 lines of text per page (an over estimate) that means a novel is about 10,000 lines of text. So a million lines is about 100 novels. If you read 2 novels each week you can read a hundred in a year so in theory you could read a million lines a year. So 20 million lines is 20 years of reading a hundred novels a year. 

Thus, if you had wanted to read the Windows code, from back in the stone ages when I left, you would need 20 years of 10,000 lines of reading every single week just to read though it once. Seriously, by year 17 would you really remember what you had read the 13th week of year 3?

NO ONE can possibly understand all the code in Windows and that is but one single code base in one single company.

By ANY measure, this music editor that we have created, that we have built in a semester, and which may be the biggest project that you have ever worked on, is a mere wisp, a tiny thing, barely a glance in the direction of a REAL code base! I wanted you to have a hint of what a bigger project can look like in its infancy, how an enormous project grows from a tiny seed of an idea, "Hey I wonder if we can do a music notation application all with gestures" or in the case of Windows, "What if we have several applications running on the screen all at the same time".

So, what if we use this gesture architecture to create other editors for other notational systems, math, architecture, chemistry, electrical circuits?

This class has ended, but there is NO END to the questions that we can ask, and no end to the code that we can imagine and write.

It is my sincere hope as your tour guide for this one simple week long hike, I have shown you that you CAN indeed build entire mountains working just one teaspoon full at a time. There is no MAGIC to creating an application, it is just one step after another. 

I also hope that this introduction to my reaction architecture has conveyed to you that we software engineers have indeed barely scratched the surface on User Interface Paradigms. Mice and Menus, scrollbars and listboxes are NOT the end of UI, they were merely a beginning. 

There are still vast unexplored terrains out there that are open to those who are willing to whip out their compilers and start writing some code, just a class or two to see if we might be able to do something like ... this.

Enjoy!
Marlin
