## Java 2-2 Structured Data [&LT;](Java0201.md) [&GT;](Java0203.md)
# Testing

ALWAYS BE TESTING! Write a little code, test it.

Now you want to see if the Person class that you just wrote works.

So we go to the Hello class, that is the class with the main routine for our project. It should have a single line in that main routine that looks like:

```java
  System.out.println("Hello world");
```

We are going to use that as a sandbox to test this code. Modify main to create a new Person and to print that person out.

```java
  System.out.println("\nTesting Person");
  Person x = new Person();
  System.out.println(x);
```

I hope that you recognize that 2nd line as a variable declaration. (Because the declaration is inside a function is is in the 2nd pool, a local variable on the statck). I have declared the variable named x to hold a thing of type Person, then on that same line I also initialized the variable to hold a newly created person. 

You have never seen this construct before. It is the way that you create all objects - you used the keyword **new** followed by a function that is known as a **constructor** for your class. Every class you create comes with a default constructor that was created automatically for you. This default constructor takes no arguments, it just creates the storage space that will hold the three things that a Person has and puts nothing into that space, so the first name will be null, the last name null and the age will be zero. 

You have seen 'System.out.println()' before BUT you have only seen it when the argument was a String. Here the argument is a Person. Will it work? What will it do? Run it and see.

## Hello 1.0

```java
  package hello;
  
   public class Hello {
  
     public static void main(String[] args) {
       System.out.println("\nTesting Person");
       Person x = new Person();
       System.out.println(x);
     }
   }
```

[next: Override toString](Java0203.md)