## Java 2-1 Structured Data [&LT;](Java0110.md) [&GT;](Java0202.md)
# Classes &amp; Constructors

Much of the rest of this course will consist of writing classes. I will basically tell you what we want to do, then I will show you how to write it, and then explain in more detail. 

In much of the commentary I will want to just highlight and show you some small portion of the code, typically a single change that I made and not have to show you the entire code from start to finish - however you will of course need all of the code to be able to run it.

So what I am going to do in this book format is go back and forth between commentary pages like this with lots of text, and then code pages which will always be complete text files showing code, either classes or interfaces when we get to them. You should be able to copy and paste the entire thing into NetBeans and have it run. But that wouldn't help you learn much. What I would prefer is for you to read my commentary, read the code and then try to <i>write the code entirely from memory</i>, referring back to my code only when memory fails. The point being that language learning is not just reading, it is production - I don't want you to just be able to read Java, I want you to be able to speak it as well. You won't really learn where you NEED to put in semicolons if you don't type in the code, forget them, and then get punished for forgetting.

We are trying to get to the point where I could tell you, as I would tell any young programmer working for me, "Hey in that hello project I'm gonna need a Person class, something simple with just a couple Strings for first and last name and an int for age." Then you would say, "No problem" and you would write that class. 

You would create a file named 'Person.java' in the folder 'hello' and initialize it with a package statement and a class signature:

```java
  package hello;
  
  public class Person {
  
  }
```

Now I wanted my Person to have a String for firstName and lastName and an integer for age, so we would add these lines (properly indented) into the definition of the class.

```java
    public String first;
    public String last;
    public int age;
```

(I know I told you that variables are almost always private instead of public. Please bear with me for this example and make them all public.)

Please notice that the type 'String' is capitalized (and therefore a class) but 'int' is not (it is a java keyword - technically a 'primitive' datatype). The above lines are all declaring both their visibility (public) and the type of the data (either String or int) as well as the name of the member variable (first, last and age).

The IMPORTANT thing to notice is that these variables are NOT static. These are no longer GLOBAL variables. They are not in the first pool of memory, they are in the 3rd pool. These variables are FIELD names in the structured datatype named Person. Every person that you construct will have these three fields or variables associated with them.

In case you have any trouble figuring out how to insert one chunk of code into another, I will occasionaly at the end of a section show you the entire class file at the end.

## Person 1.0

```java
  package hello;
  
  public class Person {
    public String first;
    public String last;
    public int age;
  }
```

  [next: Testing](Java0202.md)