## Java 5-2 Arrays and Loops [&LT;](Java0501.md) [&GT;](Java0503.md)
# ArrayList and the All pattern

Arrays can be very useful. You certainly need to be comfortable using them and writing "for loops" to go through your arrays, but there are some limitations on arrays that make them less useful for containing lists. In particular, Arrays are always a fixed size. If your list was created with ten elements, well then it has ten elements and you can't just add more. There is a more useful structure known as an ArrayList that allows this dynamic resizing.

You could of course add an element to an array by creating a new array with one more slot than the previous array and then copying all of the values out of the old array to the new one, but that is essentially what the ArrayList class does for you. It uses an underlying array and it does all the copying and expanding so you don't have to.

There are several classes in Java known as the "Collection" classes with names like List, Map, Set, ArrayList, HashMap, TreeMap etc. They are some of the most useful classes in the Java Library.

The Java JDK that you downloaded comes with a library of classes which other people have written that are available for you to use. The Java language itself is rather small, but the library is HUGE, full of thousands of classes. You will never know it all. The only path to mastery is to spend a bit of time here and there reading documentation. You can either wait until you need to know something, hope you can Google for the right words and maybe find some ignorant nimrod that points you in the right direction, or you can actively spend some time now and again just browsing through the thousands of classes and see what is there. It's like the difference of only going to the store when you need to buy something and going to just browse through the shelves and see what they have. Both activities have their merits.

The docs could easily move around, but here is where they were at the time of my writing this:

<a href="http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/">http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/</a>

If that link is still live, take a look at the long list of class names in the scroll box in the lower left corner. You can click on any one of them and see the docs for that class in the main window. All of those classes are available to you in the base Java system. Go ahead and look up ArrayList. It tells you about it, shows you the constructors, and the functions that you can call on it.

And now, back to our code. It is often convenient to have a class keep track of all of the elements that it has created. For example, it may be useful to have a list of all the Persons that have been created. One way to do this is with the "all pattern". We want to create a variable named all in the Person class that will be a list of all persons, and then in the Person constructor make sure that every constructed Person gets onto that list.

So up in the variable declaration section of the Person class we will add this line:

```java
  public static ArrayList<Person> all = new ArrayList<>();
```

When you first add this line you will see red underlines on the word ArrayList. That is because ArrayList is not exactly part of the Java Language. It is in the library. You need to tell java where to find the class ArrayList (since it is not a restricted keyword, you could have created your own class ArrayList and maybe that is what you wanted to do.) An import statement up at the top of the class tells Java where to find the class. Fortunately NetBeans, and all modern IDEs, will fix your import statements for you IF the class you are talking about is one of the ones that came out of the HUGE JDK library. Just right click on the word "ArrayList" and in the drop down dialog click fix imports. It may ask if you mean the one in the utils package and yes, that is the right one. NetBeans will then add the import statement that you need and you should be good to go.

The line creates the variable all and initializes it to be a new ArrayList of Persons. This is the first time that we have seen an object type with the angle brackets. This is a thing know as a "generic". Generics were not in the original version of Java, they were added in version 5 or 6. Generics are there to improve the type-checking, particularly in the Collection classes when you are dealing with homogeneous collections. A homogeneous collection (contrasted with a heterogeneous one) is a collection where everything in the collection is of the same type. In our case, we want a list only of Persons so the list will be homogeneous.

We could have wanted a list of Named, another homogeneous list, but in this example we plan to keep the list in the Person class. The Person class should be able to maintain a list of persons, but in some sense the Person class does not technically know about any other named objects, and thus it is probably not appropriate for the Person class to be tracking Animals or other Named things.

Basically we declare that all is an ArrayList of Person and Java will know that anything that goes into or comes out of this collection is a Person. In the days before generics there was a class called ArrayList and you could shove anything into it. If you shoved a Person in, Java had no complaints. When you pulled something out YOU might know that it was a Person, because that was the only thing that you ever shoved into that list, but Java did not know that what you fetched out was a Person. If you wanted to put the thing that you pulled out of a list into a Person variable you had to first prove to Java that you knew what you were doing and show java that the thing that you pulled out was indeed a Person. There is a special Java construct that forces this type check called "casting." Just for the record, (because you may see this if you read old code,) here is a line that fetches something off of a list and "casts" it (meaning "claims" it) as a Person.

```java
  Person foo = (Person) all.get(17); // get the 17th element from the all list
```

The type name in parens (Person) forces Java to check that the 17th element is in fact of type Person (and it will throw an exception if it was not). In the old days, if you did not cast, Java would not allow the expression at all claiming that you had a type mismatch. As far as Java was concerned, all.get returns an Object but you are trying to treat this Object as a Person. The cast was telling Java "I happen to know, this Object is really a Person. Check it at run time but let me make the assignment."

Now that we have generics and can build homogeneous ArrayLists, there is no need for casting.

The other REALLY important thing to notice about the declaration of the variable above is that it was marked as static. What's that all about?

static tells you that there is only one of these things attached to the class itself instead of being attached to the object. Every single Person has a first name, so that variable is NOT static. Every single Person has a last name, so that variable is not static, Persons are or are not cougars, so that's another non-static variable. But every single Person does NOT need to lug around a copy of the list of all Persons. The list of all Persons should be maintained in a single variable in a single location by the Person class. That is what static means - keep one single copy of this in the class - NOT in the objects that the class creates.

Since x is a Person, we can talk about x.first, which references the Person's first name. We can talk about x.last or x.cougar BUT we cannot type x.all, because all is not a property of an object! We just defined all as a property of the class. We must instead use the expression Person.all - you name the class and use the dot notation to look at a property of the class. This is the reason that we gave this variable the rather bland name "all" and called it the "all pattern," because when we use it the meaning should be clear. We could later write Person.all and Animal.all and Car.all and it is pretty clear that you mean all of the Animals or all of the Cars.

So, we are halfway done. We built a static variable to hold the ArrayList and we intialized it to be a newly constructed and empty ArrayList. Now we need to fix the Person constructor to add each new Person to the all list. Easy enough, in the Person constructor add the line:

```java
  all.add(this);
```

Recall that inside the constuctor the word "this" refers to the object that is being constructed. The new line adds the fresh Person to the all list.

There you have the all pattern - a mere two lines. Static variable <b>all</b> and one line in the constructor.

Lets check that it works over in Hello.

We used to have the line

```java
  Named[] b = {x, y, ...}
```

replace that with

```java
  ArrayList<Person> b = Person.all;
```

So b is now that same array that sits in the person class. Will our for loop still work? NO - it assumend that b was an array so it was using [] to fetch out the elements. Replace the for loop with the code

```java
  for(int i = 0; i<b.size(); i++){
    System.out.println(b.get(i).name());
  }
```

There are several changes. First of all, you need to click on ArrayList and import it into your Hello class. ArrayLists have a size() function rather than a length property, hence the change on how you increment your loop. You also need to use a get() function to fetch the element from an ArrayList. So our for loop should now be able to print the names of all of the Persons.

Of course, we could have dispensed entirely with the variable b and just used this line in the for loop:

```java
  System.out.println(Person.all.get(i).name());
```

Meaning, "go to the Person class, fetch out the all list, from that list fetch the ith element and invoke the name function on that person."

Last but not least, when they introduced generic collections in Java, they also added an enhanced for loop for iterating through collections. We could replace the for loop entirely with this:

```java
  for(Person p : Person.all){
    System.out.println(p.name());
  }
```

The : is read as "in" - So you read this as "for each Person p in Person dot all".

You still need to know how to do for loops and arrays BUT as you can see, generics, ArrayLists, and the enhanced for systax all make things a little easier to read.

Homework - use the "all" pattern on the Animal class as well.

## Person.java 3.0

```java
  package hello;
  
  import java.util.ArrayList;
  
  public class Person implements Named{
    private String first;
    private String last;
    private int age;
    private boolean cougar = false;
    private static int COUGAR_CUT_OFF = 20; // snog someone 20 years younger and become a cougar
    public static ArrayList<Person> all = new ArrayList<>();
  
    public Person(String first, String last, int age){
      this.first = first;  // user passes in f, we load it into the slot first
      this.last = last;
      this.age = age;
      all.add(this);
    }
  
    public void snogs(Person p){
      System.out.println("Holy smoke, " + this + " just snogged " + p);
      if(!this.cougar && this.age > (p.age + COUGAR_CUT_OFF)){
        this.cougar = true;
        System.out.println("Cougar detected!");
      }
    }
  
    @Override
    public String toString(){
      return last + ", " + first + (cougar ? ", a known cougar,":"");
    }
  
    @Override
    public String name() {
      return first + " " + last;
    }
  }
```

## Hello.java

```java
  package hello;
  
  import java.util.ArrayList;
  
  public class Hello {
  
    public static void main(String[] args) {
      System.out.println("\nTesting Person");
      Person x = new Person("Mick", "Smith", 19);
      Person y = new Person("Sally", "Jones", 84);
      System.out.println(x);
      System.out.println(y);
      y.snogs(x);
      y.snogs(x);
  
      Animal a = new Animal("Smokey", "bear", "Only you can prevent forest fires");
      System.out.println(a);
  
      Named n  = x;
      System.out.println(n.name());
      n  = a;
      System.out.println(n.name());
  
      ArrayList<Person> b = Person.all;
      for(int i = 0; i<b.size(); i++){
        System.out.println(b.get(i).name());
      }
      System.out.println("--All persons--");
      for(Person p : Person.all){System.out.println(p.name());}
    }
  }
```

[next: Maps](Java0503.md)