## Java 2-5 Structured Data [&LT;](Java0204.md) [&GT;](Java0206.md)
# Constructor (non-default)

When we run the code with some values shoved into our Person we get:

```java
  Testing Person
  dude named: Smith, Mick
```

It works, but I don't like it. Here I am in the Hello class shoving variables into slots that are defined all the way over in the Person class. Shouldn't the Person class be able to manage its own variables?

You are right. We shouldn't have to do that in the Hello class. In fact, as I recall, I recommended that variables in classes normally be private. So go do that (I'll wait here). Change the variables in Person from public to private. Now go back to Hello and watch VSC freak out. Notice where it freaks out. Not in Person but in Hello. "You can't do that - You can't get at those private variables from over here in Hello! Those variables are not visible"

Suddenly "x.first" has no meaning at all!

This is good.

What we are going to do now is build our own constructor. It will be the job of the constructor to "construct" the person complete with his name and age.

In the old code, when we called 'new Person()', we had NOT written a function named 'Person()', that was a 'default constructor'. Java wrote it for you, a bare bones, allocate space but put nothing in it, constructor. 

A Constructor in a class is just a function BUT Constructors have a special signature that is just a wee bit different from a normal function signature.

First of all, constructors are REQUIRED to have the same name as the class, upper case first letter and all. Secondly, they have no freedom in their return type because it MUST match the class type (I mean a Person constructor must return an object of type Person)

As a result, a constructor for Person could look like this:

```java
  public Person(String f, String l, int a){
    first = f; // user passes in f, we load it into the slot first
    last = l;
    age = a;
  }
```

We add this constructor to the Person class - usually constructors are placed near the front so we put this before the toString override. In reality, functions can be in any order at all inside of a class. As a matter of fact the variables that the class defines could be in any order, and worst of all, you could intermix the variable declarations and the function definitions willy-nilly. Needless to say, if you did that you would be shot. Put your variables first, then your constructors and then your other functions.

You might think that you are done once you have the better constructor but switch over to the Hello class and try to run and you'll see that you are NOT done yet.

Now that you have defined your own constructor, that old default one that took no arguments over in Hello is *illegal*. You only get to use the default constructor if you don't define your own. Once a class takes responsibility for its constructors it is fully responsible.

But this is good. This is why we wanted to make a new constructor, so that we could call it and get rid of the three lines over in Hello that were shoving values into the Person.

So we modify Hello to have:

```java
  Person x = new Person("Mick", "Smith", 19);
  System.out.println(x);
```

and give it a whirl.

## Person 1.2
```java
  package hello;
  
  public class Person {
    public String first;
    public String last;
    public int age;
  
    public Person(String f, String l, int a){
      first = f;  // user passes in f, we load it into the slot first
      last = l;
      age = a;
    }
  
    @Override
    public String toString(){return "dude named: " + last + ", " + first ;}
  }
```

## Hello.java

```java
  package hello;
  
  public class Hello {
  
    public static void main(String[] args) {
      System.out.println("Hello World");
      Person x = new Person("Mick", "Smith", 19);
      System.out.println(x);
    }
  }
```

[next: Java Keyword 'this'](Java0206.md)