## Java 5-1 Arrays and Loops [&LT;](Java0404.md) [&GT;](Java0502.md)
# Intro

An array is a numbered list of elements. You give the array one single variable name, declare it as a variable that is an array, and then you can either talk about the entire array by naming the variable, or talk about a single element in the array by using the array name with square brackets around the number of the item that you want. So, for example, if you declared:

```java
  int[] b;
```

b is the name of an integer array, whereas b[0] or b[19] would be specific elements in that b array.

Nearly every modern computer language numbers their elements from zero. So the first element of b would be b[0]. If you have N elements in an array and the numbering starts at zero then the numbers run up to N-1. This is a little strange at first glance, but is not difficult once you get used to it. So if there are 3 elements in an array, they would be numbered 0,1,2.

Java allows you to assign values to all of the elements in an array in the same line that you declare the array. For example, at the very end of your Hello.main insert:

```java
  int[] b = {19, 27, -6};
  System.out.println(b[2]);
```

When you run it did you get the -6 that you expected? You did expect that, right? Three elements in the list numbered 0,1, and 2, so the last value will be at 3-1 == 2.

It is useful to know that if you declare a variable to be an array but don't initialize it with a bunch of values, then there is no array yet. Declaring the variable alone did not create an array, it needs to be initialized. Alternatively, if you know how much space you need in the array, for example you need an array with 17 elements, you can tell Java that when you declare the array.

```java
  int[] b = new int[17];
```

It looks a little bit like a constructor and it acts like one, but it is not really. Notice the square brackets when you told it that there would be 17 elements. This is not a function call - it is just the way that Java allocates an array of a given size.

Of course, a good programmer would gag at a line like that. The first thought in your head should be: "What is that magic number 17? Puh-leeze!"

```java
  int WIDGET_MAX = 17;
  int[] b = new int[WIDGET_MAX];
```

There you go, much better. Lets go back to the 3 element array that was initialized directly with elements 19,27, and -6.

We saw that if you did a println of b[2] you got -6. Do a println on b[3] an element that is beyond the length of this array. What do you get? I got an exception:

```text
  ...
  Smokey the bear
  Exception in thread "main" java.lang.ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException: 3
  at hello.Hello.main(Hello.java:23)
  Java Result: 1
```

When you put the number 3 in for the array index, Java could not tell before you ran the program whether or not that was a legal value for the array. (Yes, you only put a 3 element long array into b, but Java knows that you could always later change the value of b - b would still need to be an int[] but you could have shoved a newer bigger array into b that would allow the index 3,) so this "array index out of bound error" is not caught until runtime. Some languages do not do this. They cheerfully read some random thing out of memory that they never allocated. Java checks that the array index is inbounds every single time just before use and throws an error message if the index was not valid (and yes, this is a speed penalty to make that check every single time. Good thing computers keep getting faster and faster every year.)

Suppose you want to look at every element in the array. Sure you could write code like:

```java
  System.out.println(b[0]);
  System.out.println(b[1]);
  System.out.println(b[2]);
```

But that would sure be tedious if you had 100 items on the list. There is a better way. We use a structure called a "for loop" to do this. For loops and Arrays go together like peanut butter and chocolate - when you see one the other can't be far behind. I will just write the for loop for you here and then explain it.

```java
  for(int i = 0; i<b.length; i++){
    System.out.println(b[i]);
  }
```

You can hopefully see the block indented between the braces. This is a block of code that we will do over and over. Notice that there is a variable in that block, the integer variable i. Basically we want to start i with one value, run the block, then step i up to the next value, then run the block, ... the computer does this over and over until it hits some boolean condition that tells it to stop executing the block and to go do whatever code follows the end of the block.

There are three essential chunks of code that are not actually part of the block and those three, listed in the for line, are:
1.An initialization step - declare a loop variable, in this case "i" and initialize it to zero because, duh, all arrays always start with zero. That is the int i = 0; part.
2.A boolean guard - the i<b.length; part - as long as this guard is true do the block again. In this case if i is less than the length of the array. Think about it, the array is 3 long, so if i is some number like 2 (the last element) then it is less than 3 so we pass the guard, but the next value, 3 itself, is not less than 3 so we won't do the block when i is 3.
3.An increment - that is the i++ expression. This is what you do to the loop variable just before we check the boolean guard. ++ is an operator that increments a variable by one.

So the first line of the for loop looked like this:

```java
  for(initialization_statement; guard_expression; increment_statement)
```

The <i>initialization</i> declared i to be an int starting at zero.

The <i>guard required</i> i to be less than the length of the array.

The <i>increment</i> was just to increment i by one each time.

Go ahead and remove the <b>println(b[2])</b> from Hello and replace it with the for loop to print all the elements of b and see that you get the three lines

```java
  19
  27
  -6
```

That for loop that I showed you is an idiom of the language. <b>Memorize it!</b> 99% of the for loops that you write will look just like that. 

The fact is, the for loop itself is an abbrievation for something known as a "while loop." This is a for loop:

  for(initialize; guard; increment){
    block
  }

Here is the same thing as a while loop:

```java
  initialize;
  while(guard){
    block
    increment;
  }
```

The while loop does not require initialization or an increment. It just has a guard and it will do the loop over and over WHILE the guard is true. So a while-loop is technically simpler than a for-loop. Sometimes the while-loop structure is more convenient, but typically you do need to initialize and guard and increment, and the for-loop collects all this information up front. When dealing with arrays the for-loop is the more common structure. Furthermore, with arrays, the initialization, guard and increment are almost alway the same: <b>int i = 0; i&lt;foo.length; i++</b>. It is the body that is different each time.

An example: copy the loop that printed out b, paste it right below itself and edit the first copy so that it loops through the array, writing in new values. Your code should look like this:

```java
  for(int i = 0; i<b.length; i++){
    b[i] = 5*i; // i.e. b is 0, 5, 10 when i is 0, 1, 2
  }

  for(int i = 0; i<b.length; i++){
    System.out.println(b[i]);
  }
```

We still go through the array one at a time, the first loop creating the new b values, the second loop printing them out. We could have done that with one single loop with two lines in the block like this:

```java
  for(int i = 0; i<b.length; i++){
    b[i] = 5*i; // i.e. b is 0, 5, 10 when i is 0, 1, 2
    System.out.println(b[i]);
}
```

But enough playing with integer arrays. Let's create a Person array.

Change the declaration of b into

```java
  Person[] b = {x, y, new Person("John", "Doe", 45)};
```

Notice that the array initializer doesn't care if they are our previously defined Persons (good ol' x and y) or newly created Persons. It just makes a list of Persons.

You will need to remove the loop that set the values in the b array to integers since b is no longer an integer array. But you can leave the loop that does a println on b.

See, it prints out the toString call for each Person on the list.

Now change the line in the for loop block to be

```java
  System.out.println(b[i].name());
```

This is very similar to the previous run, except this time we are calling the name() function for each person.

Now I want you to try to add an animal to the list. Recall that variable a was Smokey the Bear. Modify the b declaration to be:

```java
  Person[] b = {x, y, new Person("John", "Doe", 45), a};
```

We just added a to the list. NetBeans should complain. Hover and see the message: "Incompatible types, required: Person, found: Animal"

That is correct, the Person Array can only hold persons and a was not a person. So lets change the array type from Person to Named. b will just be a list of named things.

```java
  Named[] b = {x, y, new Person("John", "Doe", 45), a};
```

Now, there should be no problems, the Persons are Named, the Animal is Named and the for loop that prints them out calls the Named.name function. Run it now and see the results. Since the for loop that does the printing calls the name function, and since that is valid for any named object it should print out the names of everything on the list.

[new: ArrayList and ALL pattern](Java0502.md)