## Java 6-2 Mastermind [&LT;](Java0601.md) [&GT;](Java0603.md)
#  Cows and Bulls

We now know enough that we should be able to write our first computer game. We are going to build a version of the game MasterMind. I first saw this game when it was running on the mainframe computer at Caltech (don't ask what a mainframe is - it dates me). The game started as a computer game and was later marketed as a game for two people played with colored pegs. We will call our game Mastermind but in reality the game is Cows and Bulls which was the game that I first saw at Caltech.

So here is the game as we will play it.

The computer thinks of a 4 digit number (at random). You are going to try to guess the number that the computer is thinking of in the fewest number of guesses.

You tell the computer your guess by typing in a 4 digit number, and the computer will give you feedback on how well your guess matches its hidden number.

The computer's feedback to you consists of two numbers, your Cows and your Bulls score. (These were the white and black pegs in the colored peg game). A single Bull indicates that you have a digit that is BOTH a correct digit AND is located in the correct position in your number. A single Cow indicates that you have a digit that is correct but it is in the wrong position.

Based on the computer's feedback you get to make another guess, and it just keeps going until you guess the correct number and get the perfect score, 4 bulls.

Your score at the end of the game is the number of guesses that you needed to make.

That's it. A fairly simple game. If you are like most people, you immediately start wondering how you actually count the number of cows and bulls. That is because as a human that it the most difficult thing in the game. 

Selecting the right colored pegs out of the box, picking them up and placing them in holes is so trivial that it doesn't merit any conscious thought. Of course, if you were building a robot to play, those tasks would be immeasurably harder problems that counting the cows and the bulls. 

We won't be building a robot quite yet, but there are other "tricky" aspects to this game and computing cows and bulls is just one of them. Some of the others that we will need, and that we will learn along the way are: How do we generate random numbers (so that we can create our hidden number)? How do we collect numeric input from the user (so the user can input a guess)? For that matter, how do we collect String input from the user? (so we could collect the user's reply to, "Do you want to play again?") How do we break a single number down into a list of digits (so that we can count individual digits)?

We will wade into these issues in the next several sections.

[next: Inheritance and abstract classes](Java0603.md)