## Java 6-6 Mastermind [&LT;](Java0605.md) [&GT;](Java0607.md)
# Integer Math
==Hist and Integer Math
We will need some code that will shred a single number into its list of digits. We need this so that we can shred the random number that was used to generate the hid, and we also need it to shred each guess that the user makes. Number shredding uses some integer math that you haven't seen before and that will need some discussion. This code will be the only function in the Hist class and we will call it setDigits() even though it will both set the digits and set the histograms as well. I will just write the code and then come back and explain the parts that are new and the one part that was a little strange.

```java
  public void setDigits(int x){
    for(int i = 0; i < N; i++){
      int lowOrderDigit = x % RADIX;
      digits[i] = lowOrderDigit;
      x = x / RADIX;
    }
    // once the digits are set, we can compute the histogram
    for(int i = 0; i < RADIX; i++){hist[i] = 0;} // first clear all the counts
    for(int i = 0; i < N; i++){hist[digits[i]]++;} // increment count of the ith digit 
  }
```

So the new thing is the operator % which is a "mod" or "modulus" operator. A mod B tells you the remainder you get when you divide A by B. So for example 8 mod 5 is 3 so 8 % 5 == 3. When you do a mod using a number's base, you are extracting the last digit. Think about it if you have the number 3257 and you divide it by 10 you get "10 goes into 3257, 325 times with a remainder of 7" or looked at differently, 3257/10 == 325.7 in decimal which is 325 and 7 tenths. The 7 tenths tells you that the remainder is 7 out of 10. And of course 7 was the low order digit of the number 3257.

Computers don't do integer math quite the way that you do. They add subtract and multiply just like you but division is different. One divided by two is not an integer, it is a fraction that takes two numbers to describe. Since the integer slots on the computer can hold exactly one number an integer will not hold a fraction. So when you do integer division the computer truncates - just like you did in elementary school before you learned fractions. You said, "5 goes into 8, one time with a remainder of 3 or 8/5 is 1 and 3 fifths". That is what the computer does with integers. If you do 8/5 you get the result 1. If you do 1/2 you get the result 0. It is exactly what you would get if you did the decimal division and then truncated the fractional part. THERE IS NO ROUNDING. 1.9999 becomes 1 and 9999/100000 == 1

The mod operator, the %, does exactly the same division problem, it just returns the fractional part instead of the whole part.

All computers do this - meaning they do integer math a little differently than the way that you do it. The differences are of two types. 1) division is done with truncation like I just described and 2) as I already mentioned previously the precision of a computer is limited to numbers on the range of 2 billion on a 32 bit computer. So yes, if you add 2 billion to 2 billion on a pc you will get - Wait a minute, why am I telling you this? You have a computer with NetBeans opened up and a file with a main routine right there. Print out the result of adding 2 billion to 2 billion (2 billion is 2 followed by 9 zeros)

```java
System.out.println(2000000000 + 2000000000);
```

Look at that: the result is -294967296

What a piece of junk - no warning that it is doing something wrong. No indication that the result was out of range. No error message - just a wrong answer. I should write angry letters to Intel. I should complain to my congressman, I should ... just chill out.

There are many roads with beautiful views looking over cliffs down at the seaside. The wise driver does not drive over the cliff. That would be bad! Same thing with code. Don't drive over the cliff. Know the limits of your machine and don't exceed them. The computer is different from you in the way it does math. It is WAY faster, it is WAY more accurate, and it NEVER checks whether what it is doing makes any sense at all. Don't try to push it where it can't go.

I want to point out one other useful thing about %. Chances are that after you learned about remainders in elementary school you never used them nor thought about them again. You may use addition or even division in real life, but remainders? It turns out that on computers, when you are often playing with arrays of stuff, 'mod' can be a useful operator. 

Suppose you have an array of length N, then as you know the index of the array ranges from 0 to N-1. What else ranges from 0 to N-1? Well the remainder of a division problem that was SOMEBIGNUMBER divided by N is in that range. In other words if you have an array Foo and some positive number i, possibly Foo[i] is invalid because i is out of range, but Foo[i%Foo.length] is always valid. You can use i%N to shove i into the range from 0 to N-1. (I know - never say never - i%Foo.length is NOT valid if Foo.length is zero.)

I haven't yet talked about the thing that was a little strange.

Look again at the shredding code. Suppose we start with the number x is 3257. The mod by RADIX gave us 7 as the lowOrderDIgit, we saved it in the array and then reduced x to 325 (doing the truncated divide). Next pass through the loop we extract the low order digit of 5, store that in the array and reduce x to 32 and so on. We seem to be storing the digits in the array in backwards order. That seems a little strange. I will end up with digits being the array {7, 5, 2, 3}. This is correct. I am storing the number backwards, but it turns out that I don't care. The reason is that if I store hid backwards AND I reverse every single guess that the user makes everything will work out just fine. No one will ever see what order I stored my digits in. So I did it backwards and it works fine backwards so I left it backwards.

So our helper class Hist is finished and next we will actually calculate the cows and bulls and write the game.

 [next: Finally the Game](Java0607.md)