## Java 4-1 Conditionals and Booleans [&LT;](Java0302.md) [&GT;](Java0402.md)
# Primitive types

I have used only a couple of Java's built in types so far, String and int. We have learned that when you create a class you are essentially creating a new variable type. Of course, classes all start with capital letters so you can tell the types that YOU create and this should make you suspicious that String, unlike int, is actually a class, and indeed it is.

There are only a handful of types in java that are NOT classes and these types are called "primitive types". The primitives in java are:

```java
  char boolean byte int short long double float
```

Basically char holds one single character of data. A String is actually an ordered list of chars. And because our language works in long strings of characters, the String is a far more important and used data type than is the single lowly char. 'char' is there if you need it, but unless you are doing something like writing a word processor or a language compiler, you will likely not use 'char'.

boolean is named after George Boole, a british mathematician that helped develop modern logic. A boolean variable is a variable that can hold either the value true or the value false. Boolean Algebra is basically Boole's discovery that you can solve a broad class of logic puzzles using things that look like equations and using rules similar to algebra where the variables, the unknowns, like x and y are allowed to have only those two truth values. I will have more to say about booleans in the next lecture.

The next 4 primitives, byte, int, short and long, are all varients of the int type that holds one single integer. The only difference is in the size of number that they can hold and how much memory the integer will take up in computer memory.

The byte is 8 bits long and can hold 256 values, so it can only be used for very small values. In many ways it is of historical use rather than of practical use - back when memory was expensive and computers were small this was the fundamental unit for passing numbers around. It is stil the fundamental way that we talk about the size of computer memory, which now rests in Kilobytes or Megabytes or Gigabytes or Terabytes (thousands, millions, billions, trillions) of data. At the time that I write this in early 2013, Facebook adds about half a Petabyte - that's a thousand trillion or a quadrillion bytes - of new user data to its storage every day).

A more practical size (just barely), short, is 16 bits long i.e. 2 bytes and can hold numbers up to about 32 thousand.

The word int is used to describe the basic 32 bit (4 bytes) number that is good for most calculations. It can hold a number up to about 4 billion.

The last in the integer category, long, is 64 bits (8 bytes) which can hold a number as big as 16 billion billion, for use when 32 bits is just not quite enough.

The desktop computers that we use these days are mostly 32 bit or 64 bit. What this refers to is mostly the rate at which these computers will fetch stuff from their memory. A 32 bit machine most naturally wants to move one single 32 bit number at a time. Similarly the 64 bit machines want to move things in 8 byte chunks. (8 bits to the byte, so 8 bytes is 8*8 = 64 bits) 

This is the main reason that bytes and shorts are rarely used. Your 32 bit machine is going to move 32 bits to memory in one chunk, even if you only wanted to change 8 of those bits. So in general, you use ints all the time and occasionally use longs if you needed an especially large number, and in those rare cases where you actually needed some number with hundreds or thousands of digits (Did you know that the millionth digit in Pi is 5? How would you check?) there are classes, like BigInt, that deal with very long integers.

The reason that these "primitive" types exist and are treated differently from the class data types is that these primitives are essentially describing basic low level machine formats. The machines themselves have slots known as registers that hold either a 32 bit or a 64 bit number.

The last two primitives, double and float, are used to represent floating point numbers for doing scientific work. So an int can hold a number like 3 or 4 or -17, but it can not hold a number like one half or 3.141592 or 5.6x10^-7. If your number has a decimal point you need a floating point format like a double. The difference between double and float is once again size. float uses 32 bits total to hold both the mantissa (the digits in the number) and the exponent. double is twice as big using 64 bits to hold those two numbers. By the way, the hideous name "double" was used historically (back in the days of FORTRAN in the early 1960s) to mean twice as big as what you get in float. Once again, modern tech has rendered the term "float," the smaller of the two, into the practically never used version. All the hardware these days uses 64 bits internally for floating point calculations, so you could use float as a storage format but you aren't saving any time by calculating with float rather than with double.

So in a practical sense, there are really only 4 primitive types: char, boolen, int and double.

Because these types are there to represent fundamental machine concepts these types cannot do all the things that a class can do. For example, you have already seen that you can take a variable of type Person

```java
  Person x;
```

and apply a function to it using the dot notation like:

```java
  x.snogs( y );
```

But you will never see us calling a function like that on an int. In java you will never see something like.

```java
  int x;
  x.snogs( y ); // WRONG
  x.plus(3); // WRONG
  4.plus(3); // WRONG
```

You can NOT treat primitives like classes. They don't have functions like that.

This is not true for all coding languages. Some languages, like Ruby, treat EVERYTHING like a class. They generally call themselves PURE object oriented languages. Java was different. They pulled the primitives out and treat them differently to remind you that the size of your integers is a fundamental machine concept.

::S Boolean Datatype
As you know, "plus" is a function. It takes two number arguments, like 3 and 4, and it returns a single number (3+4) which would of course be 7. We also have functions that you know quite well which take two numbers as arguments, but instead of returning a single number return a single boolean value. i.e.: the function "less than"

```java
  3 < 4  // this expression returns the boolean value of true
  9 < 2  // this expression returns the boolean value of false
  x < 3  // returns a boolean value depending on the value of x
```

Whatever the numbers, the final result is a boolean; that is either true or false.

The comparison operators in Java all return booleans. They are:


```java
  <, >, <=, >=, ==, !=
```

The last in the list, <b>!=</b>, stands for NOT EQUALS, the double equal sign (which is how you test for equality) will be the source of many of your programming errors. In my humble opinion it was a mistake to use those symbols, but it is there, so deal with it. The problem of course is that the single equals was used to mean "assignment" where you stuff the value of some expression into a variable.

Thus

```java
  x = 3
```

is assignment, and you have shoved the value 3 into the variable x.

```java
  x == 3
```

is a boolean expression that returns "true" if the variable x held the value 3 and returns false otherwise. The first one changes the value x, the second one tests the value x but leaves it alone.

The programming bug that you will no doubt make is that you will use a single equals in a place where you wanted to test for equality and, as a result, instead of testing the value x you will have smashed x into the value that you were testing for. In some languages with some IDEs these bugs may be very easy to find but sometimes it is rather a pain.

In Java you may declare a variable to be boolean, much the same way that you declare a variable to be an int.

```java
  boolean foo;
```

This declared the variable named foo to hold a boolean value.

Generally, when choosing the names for boolean variables try to choose one that implies a single state that is either true or not. For example, one could keep a boolean variable associated with a list named "sorted" to tell you whether or not the list is sorted. One common convention is to use the word "is" in the front of a boolean variable, so they would use "isSorted" as a variable name - implying that if the value of the boolean is true it means that the thing is sorted and if false than it is not sorted. So "isSelected", "isGreen", "isValid" would all be examples of names for boolean variables.

We are going to add a boolean variable to our Person class named "cougar" to keep track of whether or not the person is a known cougar (Older persons like Sally that snog much younger persons like Mick). It is a silly example, but it introduces several useful notions: boolean variables, conditional expressions, if statements, magic numbers, default assignment, and static variables so please bear with me. (Also, just for the record, I was not brought up with the "is" name for booleans, so I don't tend to use it. I named my boolean "cougar". A purist would insist that "isCougar" would be a better name. They would tell you that the variable name cougar, could have been some complicated object of some class Cougar and thus, "isCougar" would be a better name. I won't even disagree with the purists. I wrote this without thinking about that. I am not at this point going to rewrite it. But you could certainly adopt that convention in your code to make it just a tad better than what I presented here.)

So I would like you to now add this line to your Person class:

```java
  private boolean cougar = false;
```

place it right after the place where you declared age to be an integer.

We are declaring that all Persons will have a private variable named cougar that holds a boolean value, and in particular that value will start out being false. We did not HAVE to place that initial value here in the declaration statement. We could have instead loaded the value "false" into cougar in our constructor, but it is sometimes more convenient to see the initial value right there where the variable was declared. We set it to false because we are making the assumption that no one is considered to be a cougar until they have proven themselves to be one by snogging some much younger person. Oh and by the way, you have just learned two more java keywords, true and false.

So now the next thing we will do is modify the snogging function to detect if the person doing the snogging is acting in a cougarish fashion, and if so to set the cougar variable to true. In order to do that we will need an <b>if</b> statement which is covered in the next section.

::S Conditional Statement
==Conditional Statements - if(a){..}else{..}
Every computer language needs to make decisions; whether or not to do something, whether or not to execute some block of code, so they all have something that resembles a conditional statement. An "if" statement.

The two way decision, as Yoda says, "Either DO or DO NOT," is essentially a boolean, or rather involves a boolean expression of values. The format for this conditional statement in java is basically this:


```java
  if(boolean_expression){
    // block of code to execute if the boolean expression is true
  }
```

If the boolean expression is true the code between the braces gets executed, if the expression is false, the program instead skips the code in the block and resumes execution at the line right after the closing brace. The indenting of all the code in the block makes it easier to see it as a block - it makes it easier to see where you will go next if the expression is false. In a sense, the braces are there so that the java compiler could see where blocks begin and end and the indenting is there so that you a human can see where the blocks begin and end.

So let us write the concrete example that will test if our Person is acting like a cougar. Let us say if the snogger is 20 years or more older than the snoggee than the snogger should be branded as a cougar. Now in the snogs function, this is the variable that holds the snogger and p was the variable for the snoggee, so we want the following conditional:

```java
  if(this.age > (p.age + 20)){
    this.cougar = true;
  }
```

Once you get used to it, this almost reads like English; "if the snogger's age is greater than the snoggee's age plus 20, then the snogger is a cougar." I should also point out that we are using a one-sided notion in our definition. If you kiss your grandmother who is much older than you, that doesn't make her into a cougar, but if she is the one initiating, we call her a cougar.

Add these three lines AFTER you print the "Holy smoke" snogging message.

In fact, let's put another line inside the conditional block to print out the fact that we have detected a cougar.

```java
  if(this.age > (p.age + 20)){
    this.cougar = true;
    System.out.println("Cougar detected!");
  }
```

If you haven't modified your Hello class, you should be able to run it and test the changes we just made to the Person class. When Sally snoggs Mick we should detect a cougar.

Before we move on, I want to mention some other vocabulary. The conditional statement that we just introduced, the "if" statement, is also sometimes called a "guard". The code in the block is the "guarded code," the notion being that sometimes the code inside the block will break if certain conditions are not met and thus what you do is you wrap that code in a conditional and make sure that the required contitions are all true before you execute that code.

I will occasionally say, "you need to guard this", or "put this in the guarded code" and that is where that expression comes from.

There are a couple of other VERY common variants of the simple "if" statement and even though I didn't use it in a code example here I will mention it now so that it is no surprise when it shows up: the if-else statement. The if statement has one single guarded block that either executes or not. The if-else statement has two guarded blocks and either the first one executes, or else the second one executes. Exactly one of the two will execute. It looks like this:


```java
  if(boolean_expression){
    // this block executes if the boolean expression is true
  } else {
    // this "else" block is what executes if the expression was false
  }
```

Notice that we have two blocks, both indented. Note that the else expression (which closed the first block and opened the second block) was properly alligned with the if (not indented along with the blocks before and after). So the if-else statement will either do this or else it will do that.

The other variant that I will not show right now is called an "else if" and it is used when you have 3 or more blocks and you must select exactly one of them to execute. The cases of exactly one block to execute, or two blocks are both fairly simple because those two situations are both guarded by exactly one boolean expression.

##Person.java 2.1

```java
  package hello;
  
  public class Person implements Named{
    private String first;
    private String last;
    private int age;
    private boolean cougar = false; 
     
    public Person(String first, String last, int age){
      this.first = first;  // user passes in f, we load it into the slot first
      this.last = last;
      this.age = age;
    }
  
    public void snogs(Person p){
      System.out.println("Holy smoke, " + this + " just snogged " + p);
      if(this.age > (p.age + 20)){
        this.cougar = true;
        System.out.println("Cougar detected!");
      }
    }
  
    @Override
    public String toString(){return last + ", " + first ;} 
  
    @Override
    public String name() {
      return first + " " + last;
    }
  }
```

[next: Conditional Expressions](Java0402.md)