## Java 3-3 Interfaces and Contracts [&LT;](Java0301.md) [&GT;](Java0401.md)
# Interfaces

One of the things that often happens in programming is a situation similar to what we have right now with our Person class and our Animal class.

Both of these classes produce things that essentially have names. Sally Jones and Smokey the Bear. It is easy to imagine code that would work with any named object. I mean as long as two classes each had a function that returned a name we wouldn't really care what exact type of object we were dealing with.

However, as we have seen, whenever you declare a variable you must identify its type, either Person or Animal. What we want is the ability to have a type that sits in between and captures a notion of what is similar between those two classes. The similarity in this case being that both Persons and Animals have names. We want to capture the notion of being a Named thing.

We don't want to make the ways that things are named identical. Persons have first and last names. Animals have only a single name (and a type of animal). Buildings (if we had a building class) would have some different notion of what a name should be, so what we actually want is to allow two or more different classes to be able to implement their very own name function. Animals will do something like "Smokey the Bear" combining their name and type whereas Persons, who have no type, must do something different in their name function like "Sally Jones", however we want those two classes to agree on the signature of that name function, like that it is public, it returns a String, and it takes no arguments.

Recall, the signature of a function is 1) its name, 2) its return type, 3) the name and type of its arguments - basically everything that you write in the single line at the front of the function before you get to the implementation of the function that is wrapped in braces. The function signature is the stuff that someone needs to know in order to call or to use this function. The implementation of that function is the stuff in the braces which is a description of the actual method or code that that function uses. Pollymorphism is the recognition that classes will want to share signatures but will differ in implementations - polymorphic literally means "many shapes" - they may all "eat(food)" but each critter gets to do it differently. We will later see the word "abstract" used to refer to a function signature that is missing the implementation.

That is what an interface is - it is a collection of abstract functions. The entire interface is a contract that a class agrees to fulfill. Here would be an interface for a Named object:

```java
  public interface Named{
    public String name();
  }
```

An interface looks like a class (capital letter and all because it is defining a type) but unlike a class, there is no code. That thing that looked like a function definition was only the "signature" of the function. We told you the return type, and the argument list, and the name of the function but there are no braces, and no blocks of code that implement the function.

So from NetBeans click on the new File icon (or follow the menus) the same way you did to create a new class BUT this time, on the first dialog that pops up select "Java Interface" from the large righthand list box. "Java Interface" should be the second one on the list right below the "Java class" which is the default. On the next page verify that it is going into the hello project and the hello package and give it the name "Named".

Define the single name() function signature like we did above and there you go, you have created your first interface. Now we will go hack up Person and Animal so that they both agree to conform to that interface.

In order to tell java that the class Person follows the contract described in the Named interface you use the keyword "implements" in the class signature like this:

```java
  public class Person implements Named{
```

Go ahead and add the "implements Named" in the Person class and watch NetBeans trip over itself trying to tell you that the Person class does NOT YET conform to that contract. Well duh, we haven't implemented it yet!

This is, of course a good thing. That is why we have IDEs, to remind us of what we still need to do in a class to get it ready. You will notice that it red-underlined the class name Person. If you hover over Person you will see the cryptic message, "Person is not abstract and does not override abstract method name() in Named."

It is not all that cryptic. As you recall, a method is abstract when it has a defined signature but has no body. Since that is exactly what an interface consists of, a list of abstract methods/functions, as soon as you said that "Person implements Named," Person now has an abstract method in it. You now have two choices: you can either declare Person to be an abstract class - meaning, "Yeah, I know this class is incomplete - that's what I wanted." or you implement the missing name() method.

We will do the latter and NetBeans will help us. Notice in the hover text it told you that you could press Alt Enter. Do that and you get a dialog that lists our options to fix. The first is to make the class abstract like I just mentioned. The second is to implement all the methods in the interface, which is what we want. (Technically there are other options as well - they will make sense later) Choose the second and WOW - NetBeans writes a bunch of code for you. It wrote something like this for me:

```java
  @Override
  public String name() {
    throw new UnsupportedOperationException("Not supported yet.");
  }
```

You should understand most of this. You are overriding an abstract method - "overriding" meaning you are supplying a new implementation here. The signature of the function was listed right there in the interface so NetBeans copied that to make sure that you didn't change the signature and it created a single line using a throw command. Throwing exceptions is how you crash gracefully - basically if you try to call this function it will print the exception error message and stop - just a way to let you know that you haven't written the actual code for this function yet.

So what we do next is rip out the exception line and replace it with the real name string that we want it to return:

```java
  return first + " " + last;
```

That's all we need to do to make Person conform to the interface. Do the same for Animal. Add the line that "Animal implements Named," let NetBeans build you those implementations, then replace the exception code with the actual name of an Animal:

```java
  return name + " the " + type;
```

Now both Person and Animal conform to the interface.

Finally we want to test them both over in the Hello class. Add these lines to the bottom of the Hello.main()

```java
  Named n = x;
  System.out.println(n.name());
  n = a;
  System.out.println(n.name());
```

We create a new variable n of type Named. We shove the value x, who was a Person into n - WAIT a minute - how can it do that? I thought the only thing you could put into a Named variable was a Named thing - Oh, right, Persons implement Named - they act like named objects. This is OK. Next we print out the name of n. Then we shove a, an Animal into n. Again no problem because Animals follow the Named contract. Again we print out the name.

Before we finish, I want you to type in a couple of errors. Replace the !bn_=_a;_ line with !bNamed_n_=_a;. NetBeans warns you - you already declared n once and you don't get to do it again. Put it back to correct.

Next change one of the !bSystem.out.println(n.name()) to !bSystem.out.println(n);_ Why doesn't that work?

We have no problem doing a !bprintln(x) - since n is just x, why can't we just !bprintln(x)? The answer is that x was an object. And as an object it implemented toString(). All is well. On the other hand n is just an interface. The ONLY thing that n guaranteed was that it would follow the Named contract and the ONLY thing in the Named contract was name(). You never said a Named object had a toString function. When you put a Person into a Named bucket, You know it's really a person but Java only knows the law - "you told me it was Named, I checked that x was Named and so I let you store it in n but now as far as I am concerned that thing in n is Named and that's all it is."

This is polymorphism - the ability to let different objects have their own private notion on how to do something, their own private implemention but to agree upon some common signatures so that others can ignore the differences and use those common interfaces. It is one of the most powerful notions for managing complexity in programming. It is what allows you to say, "Hey get me this wad of information from my thumb drive, from the network, from this hard disk - yes, those are all different types of objects but for right now - ignore all the differences and concentrate on the one thing that they all implement: some interface that lets me getAFileOfStuff from them."

When you boil it all down - polymorphism is what object oriented programming lives to do.


## Named.java

```java
  package hello;
  
  public interface Named {
    public String name();
  }
```

## Person.java

```java
  package hello;
  
  public class Person implements Named{
    private String first;
    private String last;
    private int age;
  
    public Person(String first, String last, int age){
      this.first = first;  // user passes in f, we load it into the slot first
      this.last = last;
      this.age = age;
    }
  
    public void snogs(Person p){
      System.out.println("Holy smoke, " + this + " just snogged " + p);
    }
  
    @Override
    public String toString(){return last + ", " + first ;}
  
    @Override
    public String name() {
      return first + " " + last;
    }
  }
```

## Animal.java

```java
  package hello;
  
  public class Animal implements Named {
    private String name;
    private String type;
    private String sound;
  
    public Animal(String name, String type, String sound){
      this.name = name; this.type = type; this.sound = sound;
    }
  
    @Override
    public String toString(){
      return name + " the " + type + " says, \"" + sound + ".\"";
    }
  
    @Override
    public String name() {
      return name + " the " + type;
    }
  }
```
  
## Hello.java

```java  
  package hello;
  
  public class Hello {
  
    public static void main(String[] args) {
      System.out.println("Hello World");
      Person x = new Person("Mick", "Smith", 19);
      Person y = new Person("Sally", "Jones", 84);
      System.out.println(x);
      System.out.println(y);
      y.snogs(x);
      y.snogs(x);
  
      Animal a = new Animal("Smokey", "bear", "Only you can prevent forest fires");
      System.out.println(a);
    
      Named n  = x;
      System.out.println(n.name());
      n  = a;
      System.out.println(n.name());
    }
  }
```

  [next: ](Java0401.md)