## Java 8-8 Swing [&LT;](Java0807.md) [&GT;](Java0809.md)
# Swing Input

We have just done some Swing Output, learning how to put some graphic elements out to the screen. Now we need to look at the input side, learning to get coordinates from the mouse and typed characters from the keyboard.

## Listeners
Windowing systems are all about responding to events. Basically events happen, a mouse was clicked, a key was pressed, and something that listens for those events, like say a button, reacts to the event and often converts that low level event "Hey the mouse was clicked" into a higher level event like: "Hey the SaveAs menu item was clicked" or "We need to exit now"

There are many different Listeners in Java, EventListener, MouseListener, MouseMotionListener, KeyListener, etc. They are behave in roughly the same way so learning about the MouseListener is as good a way as any to understand the idea of Listeners.

MouseListener is technically an Interface. You are a MouseListener if you implement only 5 functions:

```java
  void mousePressed(MouseEvent e) 
  void mouseReleased(MouseEvent e) 
  void mouseClicked(MouseEvent e) 
  void mouseEntered(MouseEvent e) 
  void mouseExited(MouseEvent e)
```

The first two of these are the bedrock of the mouse. The user pressed the mouse button and the user released the mouse button. If both of these happened - press and release - without moving the mouse inbetween another event is generated, mouseClicked. The last two are special to Swing and basically tell you that the mouse moved inside your swing component (window, panel, button, whatever) or moved away from your swing component. We will ignore the last three of these for now (and possibly forever).

If you look up MouseEvent, you will find that it is just a bucket that encodes the important things that happened. You can get at those important things with functions like e.getX(), e.getY(), and e.getButton().

So the basic idea is this:

1.You write a MouseListener (meaning you write a class that implements MouseListener) where you write the functions that do whatever it is that you want to do when the mouse is pressed or released.

2.You add that listener to a Swing component telling it that when MouseEvents happen on that component you want to hear about it. Swing components all implement the function: addMouseListener(MouseListener ml);

The assumption is that events can happen anywhere and there may be any number of different objects all listening in. In general, you will not have lots of mouse listeners - you can, but if you do you need to know that you won't know in what order those listeners will get called - so in general to keep things simple you will have only one listener.

We are going to hack up the AAAGraphics class so that it reacts to mouse events. We could build an external class to be the MouseListener, but we are only going to use it for this one simple thing so let us instead build a static nested class. We could, in fact, build an anonymous class - and the fact is, this is the place where you will most often see anonymous classes used but we are going to keep it simple and just use a static nested class. Also this keeps all the stuff that we are doing in Swing contained in AAAGraphics so that it is a single convenient reference for you

We could just declare a static nested class that implements MouseListener BUT the fact is, that interface requires 5 functions 3 of which we will not use. We would be forced to define all 5 and have our code cluttered with 3 functions that do nothing but return.

Conveniently, there is a class already built called MouseAdapter which has already implemented the MouseListener interface. It implemented those MouseListener functions in the simplest way possible, namely null implementation. Isn't that convenient - a class that does absolutely nothing but implement the MouseListener interface. As a result instead of IMPLEMENTING a MouseListener interface we can EXTEND the MouseAdapter class. 

By extending the MouseAdapter class we have instantly satisfied the contract that we implement MouseListener. Now in that class, we can override the two functions that we want to override - So instead of writing a class that implements MouseListener and then writing 5 functions, we write a class that extends MouseAdapter and write only the two functions that we need. Our inner class will look like this:

```java
  public static class ML extends MouseAdapter{
    public void mousePressed(MouseEvent e) { System.out.println("Press"); }
    public void mouseReleased(MouseEvent e) { System.out.println("Release"); 
  }
```

So lots of explanation but little code. Now that we have a class that will talk to us about the events it sees, we need to construct one of these ML objects and add it to a Swing components. The component that we want to add it to the the JPanel that is the AAAGraphics object. We were using a default constructor for AAAGraphics previously, now we need to write one explicitly so that we can add a mouse listener.

```java
  public AAAGraphics(){
    this.addMouseListener(new ML());
  }
```

Now if you run HelloSwing you should see that you can click and release the mouse on the window and see it print the messages when those events happen.

I will also show you how that would have looked if you had used an anonymous class instead - you would NOT create a static nested class, instead, in the same line where you add the mouse listener you would add a new MouseAdapter and then immediately override the two functions. It looks like this:

```java
  public AAAGraphics(){
    this.addMouseListener(new MouseAdapter() {
      public void mousePressed(MouseEvent e) { System.out.println("Press"); }
      public void mouseReleased(MouseEvent e) { System.out.println("Release"); 
    });
  }
```

If you prefer that method of doing things, fine. I don't like it - because it places the mouse event handling code right into the middle of a function that is creating the panel. I'd rather have the mouse handling done is a class that has a name that I can remember.

Next we will build a paint application to allow us to draw on the screen with the mouse.

[next: Paint](Java0809.md)