## Java 4-4 Conditionals and Booleans [&LT;](Java0403.md) [&GT;](Java0501.md)
# Logical Ops
==Other Boolean Operators - AND, OR, XOR
So far the only boolean operators that we have seen were comparators that you could use with numbers.

The other useful boolean operators are ones that combine boolean values to create yet more boolean values. In English the names are NOT, AND and OR. In Java the names are !, &&, ||

So if you have some block of code which uses two variables x and y and you want to be sure that both numbers are positive before you enter it you would write something like:

```java
  if(x > 0 && y> 0){ /*guarded code goes here*/ }
```

On the other hand, if you don't need both of them to be positive but you need either one or the other to be positive you could write:

```java
  if(x > 0 || y> 0){ /*guarded code goes here*/ }
```

The operators work like the English language counterparts - the only time the expression

```java
  A AND B
```

is true is if both A is true and B is true. In any other case A AND B is false.

```java
  A OR B
```

is true if A is true, if B is true, or if both are true. In short the only time A OR B is false is if both A is false and B is false.

There is one important difference between English usage and the way the computers do things that was intentionally added to these operators because it was very convenient in very special circumstances. The difference is an expression shortcut, basically a guarded expression that you don't see as a guard.

Here is the deal. Suppose I give you the expression

```java
  A && B
```

the computer first tests if A is true. Suppose A is false - then without ever testing B you already know that the entire expression is false. There is no need to ever test B. This is the shortcut - don't do any extra work that you don't need to do. BUT that wasn't why this instruction was implemented this way. What they really wanted to do was to GUARD the expression B with the result of A. When A failed - B was never executed.

The place that this shows up all the time is when we get to arrays. An array is basically a list of numbers like a[1], a[2] a[3]. Suppose there are only 3 of them. If I try to look at a[5] it will fail because there ain't no fifth element in the list. Many coding languages actually generate a fault if you do this, and others actually just do the wrong thing and fetch some random value from memory and let your code go on thinking that it is working.

You can write code like this:

```java
  if(i < 4 && a[i] == 9){ 
    /*do something*/ 
  }
```

The first part verified that "i" was not too big before it went and looked at the ith element of the list a. The beauty of the shortcut boolean operators is that you don't accidentally use a bad index in an array. Since this shortcut is a guard, you could of course do it all with "if" statements, but that would be considerably longer. You would need to do something like this:


```java
  int i;
  if(i<4){
    if(a[i] == 9){ 
    /*do something*/ 
    }
  }
```

The OR operator, ||, does this same shortcut guard. In the expression A || B if A happens to be true then you are done, no need to evaluate B, the total result is already true.

Generally one should avoid complicated logical expressions. If they have more than just a few terms they become hard to read and understand. Once the expressions get too large to read it is better to factor them into cases or use nested "if" structures to make clear what it is you are doing.

I will however point out just a few of the rules of Boolean Algebra that are useful in transforming expressions. If you never need them, fine. If you need them, here they are:


```java
  !!A == A
```
two NOTs in a row doesn't change anything.

DeMorgan's Laws for negating an AND or negating an OR

```java
  !(A && B) == !A || !B
  !(A || B) == !A && !B
```

So that was an abstract discussion about other boolean operators. Let's use one in a practical situation. I updated my Hello class to have Sally snog Mick twice. This was just so I could see that she was correctly identified as a cougar. Here was the printout that I got:

```text
  run:
  Hello World
  Smith, Mick
  Jones, Sally
  Holy smoke, Jones, Sally just snogged Smith, Mick
  Cougar detected!
  Holy smoke, Jones, Sally, a known cougar, just snogged Smith, Mick
  Cougar detected!
  Smokey the bear says, "Only you can prevent forest fires."
  BUILD SUCCESSFUL (total time: 0 seconds)
```

Notice that we got the 'Cougar detected' message twice. Each time Sally snogs Mick, we notice the age difference, hammer the cougar flag to true and print out the detected message. 

I decided, rather arbitrarily, that I only want the cougar detection flag to come up the first time that a cougar was detected. I mean, we already know that Sally is a cougar, no need to yell 'detected' each time she is out robbing some cradle.

So how do we fix our code. Currently we set the cougar flag and print the detection message every time the age limit is exceeded. Now we are only interested in printing the message if a non-cougar exceeds the age limit. So we make the following change to the line that used to be:

```java
  if(this.age > (p.age + COUGAR_CUT_OFF)){
```

becomes

```java
  if(!this.cougar && this.age > (p.age + COUGAR_CUT_OFF)){
```

simple as that. Once the person becomes a cougar, the expression !cougar becomes false, the false triggers the shortcut on the && the entire expression becomes false and the guard fails. Now we no longer set the cougar flag(which was already set) and we no longer print the detected message.

If you haven't already modified Hello to double snog, make that change first. Notice the double cougar detection, then fix it in the Person code by beefing up the guard. Test it with Hello and see that you have fixed the problem.

The point that you need to learn in all this is mainly to be able to read these shortcut boolean expressions.

When you see that line of code

```java
  if(!this.cougar && .....)
```

you read it exactly this way: "If not a cougar and blah blah.." or in other words if this is a cougar we are out of here - we have failed the guard - no need to even look at that more complicated expression. The only way we ever get into that complicated expression is if we have a non-cougar in which case.... that is when we look at the more complicated expression. Or, in plain English:

If we got us a non-cougar and they just snogged a youngster then this must be a first offense so...

```java
  COUGAR DETECTED!
```

## Person.java 2.4

```java 
  package hello;
  
  public class Person implements Named{
    private String first;
    private String last;
    private int age;
    private boolean cougar = false;
    private static int COUGAR_CUT_OFF = 20; // snog someone 20 years younger and become a cougar
  
    public Person(String first, String last, int age){
      this.first = first;  // user passes in f, we load it into the slot first
      this.last = last;
      this.age = age;
    }
  
    public void snogs(Person p){
      System.out.println("Holy smoke, " + this + " just snogged " + p);
      if(!this.cougar && this.age > (p.age + COUGAR_CUT_OFF)){
        this.cougar = true;
        System.out.println("Cougar detected!");
      }
    }
  
    @Override
    public String toString(){
      return last + ", " + first + (cougar ? ", a known cougar,":"");
    }
  
    @Override
    public String name() {
      return first + " " + last;
    }
  }
```

[next: Arrays and Loops](Java0501.md)