## Java 8-2 Swing [&LT;](Java0801.md) [&GT;](Java0803.md)
# Minimal Swing

If you rearrange the windows on your screen you can have this commentary on the left and have your IDE open in a window under it on the right. Then you can see the code and read this commentary at the same time.

HelloSwing is about as small a Swing app as you can write, and quite frankly although I can read it I can't write it. I mean I can look at it and tell what it does but I could not open up a blank file and type this in from scratch. And of course you never need to. You will eventually build your self a little SwingApp class that does this and some other junk for you and then you will use that class whenever you need to create a Swing App.

We don't start with the main routine in this class. Instead we start with a helper function that we use to actually build the window. That is the function named:

```java
  createAndShowGUI()
```

Our window application needs a frame around it and that is what the JFrame class provides. The line:

```java
  JFrame frame = new JFrame("Swing App");
```

constructs us a frame and puts the String "Swing App" up in the title bar of the window. Next, we want to make sure that our application will exit when the user clicks on the close button.

```java
  frame.setDefaultCloseOperation(JFrame.EXIT_ON_CLOSE);
```

I know, you are probably just as GOBSMACKED as I am that that this must be explicitly spelled out. I mean this is just the Default close operation. You might think that they could have set the Default close operation to the default value, EXIT_ON_CLOSE so that you didn't have to type this in on EVERY SINGLE window you create. True, if you are writing an application that has state and if you want to notice that the state has changed and you want to ask the user if they want to save what they were doing before they actually exit then you would need to put is a queried exit, but COME ON - you have to TELL the system to actually EXIT when the user clicks the exit button. Give me a break!!!

Oh well, no breaks for me, none for you. You need to set the close operation so that the user can exit your program when they are done. Actually, it makes me wonder, what happens it I leave this out? Do I get a window that can't be closed, one that I need to shoot through the head from the TaskManager? I don't know. Maybe I'll try that someday.

```java
  JLabel label = new JLabel("Hello World");
  frame.getContentPane().add(label);
```

Moving right along - because this is a bogus demo app writen by some Swing promoters they created a JLabel object to show you how easy it is to add JButtons and JLabels and JTextBoxes and JScrollBars and other JWidgets to a window. You just create one, and you add it to the contentPane which is tucked somewhere inside the frame object. Did you see how that was done? We went to the frame, called getContentPane on it to get the content pane, then we called the contentPane's add function to add the label component. We will learn later that there is a thing in Swing called the LayoutManager that is also tucked into the contentPane, a LayoutManager object that you could change if you want a different type of layout. It is the job of that LayoutManager to decided exactly where on the screen to put each component when you add it.

When you are all done adding components you need to tell the LayoutManager that you are done. That is what the pack function does.

```java
  frame.pack();    
  frame.setVisible(true);
```

So that is what we do in order to create and show the window and its frame.

The way that we call that function from the main routine is a little strange. It uses a construct that we have not yet seen in Java so that is what we need to go over next.

Basically when you get into windows systems you need to start dealing with asynchronous input and output. From the name you could probably guess that what we have been doing before is synchronous input and output - and you would be correct. Your code is synchronous if it works somewhat like this: First we print out a line, then we wait for you to type a response, then we print another line ... we are synchronizing our input and output. We are prompting and waiting. 

In da olden times back when we used stone tools and cooked over fires and used teletype machines - this was the hip way to do things, print a prompt - "Enter your name:" then we wait for the user to enter their name. You, the programmer, guide the user to every single place that they can go. The Windows model is much more free form - here is a dialog full of boxes and buttons and fields and YOU, the user, are free to fill them in in any order what-so-ever and can switch to something else if you want to. You can even switch over to some other application while your first one is still spewing data out in its own window. The idea is that output and input do not need to be synchronized. Asynchronous input and output is better described with an event model. An event happenes - the Mouse got clicked, a keyboard key got pressed, a button on the screen was double clicked, a drive door was opened up - then someone or rather some chunk of code needs to deal with that event regardless of what other stuff was going on at the same time. Windows systems tend to be asynchronous and can in a sense be looked at as event pumps - their job is to detect events and route them to the proper chunk of code to deal with the event.

This generally requires something called multi-threading which we are not going to go into right now. For the most part multi-threading is something that the OS needs to do all the time and you need to do only rarely. Actually, you will do it all the time when you write Swing apps, but you will do it once, right up front in exactly the same way every single time which is practically the same as never doing it at all. Swing wants to be invoked from it's own private thread. Threads come from the class Runnable - because the operant word is "run". You "run" a thread. That means you start it up and it runs by itself as if it was its own private separate computer. Swing comes with a class SwingUtilities which has a function "invokeLater" that is used to hold the thread that you create for running Swing. So what we want to do is pass a new Runnable object to SwingUtilities.invokeLater.

What we want that Runnable object to do when the Utilities finally runs it later is to call the createAndShowGUI function that we just wrote.

Well since every different Runnable thread is going to do something different when we run it, Runnable is an abstract class. It is incomplete. It is missing the actual run code - so that you can fill it in to run some specific thing of your choosing. So normally what you would expect to do is to create a new class, give it a name, Foo, extend the Runnable class, implement the run function in Foo, create a new Foo object, and plug that one single Foo object into the function that is looking for a Runnable using the fact that every Foo is automatically immediately also a Runnable object.

The only problem with that is that it is tedious and it required me to come up with a name, Foo, that I used briefly and then never use again. Every Runnable that you will ever create will need to be a brand new class; so you must give it a name, make a new instance, call its run function and then you NEVER see or use that class again. So Java had the notion of an "Anonymous" class. This is a class with no name. It is a class, defined in place and used only once and it looks just like this:

```java
  javax.swing.SwingUtilities.invokeLater(       
    new Runnable(){
      public void run(){createAndShowGUI();}
    }    
  );
```

Take a close look. We went to the javax.swing.SwingUtilities class (did you see the package names written explicitly in front of the class name there). We called the invokeLater function and opened the parens to pass in the first argument, which is a single Runnable object. Notice that the parenthesis for that invokeLater function did not close until the 5th line. All the other lines there are the single Runnable object.

How did we get the Runnable object? Simple, we created an object with new - just like always. We said we want a new Runnable()

BUT WAIT - I though Runnables were abstract? They are missing their run function - you can't create an abstract function. Well, you can IF at the moment of the creation you supplied it with the actual implementation of the run function.

This is the anonymous class step. Runnable by itself is not complete but we will complete it right here in this class with no name by supplying it with an implementation of the abstract run function.

The run function by contract was required to be public and void and named "run" of course. What we want it to do when run is called is to createAndShowGUI().

The closing brace on the line by itself closes our definition of functions in the anonymous class. If the Runnable class was abstract with two or three functions missing, we would have had to list every function that needed to be defined inside the braces there. So the braces after the new Runnable() phrase is just like the braces that come after a class definition line, the braces that wrap the entire guts of a class where you define all of the functions of that class. Those braces wrapped the implementation of a class that had no name.

This anonymous class definition can be used anywhere. It is not some special Swing thing. Remember our Person class, that had a toString function that printed the person's full name.

I could write something like this

```java
  Person p = new Person("joe", "blow", 19){public toString(){return first;}}
```

What is that doing? Well it creates a new Person object using the new Person constructor - BUT WAIT, you included braces around a function definition - you must mean that you want an anonymous class that descends from Person and you are telling me the new override for the toString function that will show up for this one particular person because he is actually something other than just a normal person.

(Well, technically I lied. You can't quite write exactly that. I just went and tested it - the only problem - first was private in Person. My anonymous class did not have access to the dudes first name. If I had made first public, or even protected the code works as you would expect.)

Anonymous classes are useful in exactly this sort of case with Swing, because Runnable is abstract, you will build the class once, it will usually do only one single thing - namely call another function. I won't claim that they are terrifically useful. I have used them occasionally. Their problem is that they are a little hard to read, especially if you cram them all onto one line.

 javax.swing.SwingUtilities.invokeLater(new Runnable(){public void run(){createAndShowGUI();}});

Look at that mess of parens, semi-colons, and braces at the end. Almos as bad as LISP code. Is it right? Only yer IDE knows for sure.

My feeling is that you don't need to learn to write anonymous classes, but you should be able to read them because code that you borrow for Swing will have them in a few places. You will use them in this one place where you create the thread for Swing, and you may end up seeing them in also code that used MouseListeners and MouseAdapters.

The signal for when you might want to use an anonymous class is when you have some abstract class that got you almost all the way to what you want - like a MouseAdapter, where you must implement/override just one function AND once you have that new class you would only ever create just a single object and use it in this one place. Those are the times to consider using an anonymous class and just doing the one single missing implementation in place.

Next some more interesting graphical output examples

[next: Graphics Output](Java0803.md)