## Java 6-3 Mastermind [&LT;](Java0602.md) [&GT;](Java0604.md)
#  Inheritance and abstract classes

We could just build the game in one single class. It is not that complicated a game. However we immediately notice that there are some aspects of this game, like the fact that it has a score, like the fact that when we finish one game we want to ask, "Would you like to play again?", which are aspects shared by a large group of games in general, and are NOT specific aspects of this particular game. If we ever want to write a second game, we would have to do these things all over again - so what we do right up front in this game is to create a base class, Game, that holds all these fundamental and shared aspects and then we'll create a more specific class, Mastermind, which inherits from Game and adds on the additional Mastermind specific functionality.

I just didn't want you to be surprised when I start writing two classes when only one would do. The decision was arbitrary. What is even more arbitrary will be when I decide to locate some feature in Game rather than in Mastermind. It will be based on my determination of whether or not I think the feature might be useful in other games that I might write.

Sometimes, writing more general use code like this helps you to write the specific game you are trying to deal with, and unfortunately, sometimes it complicates the process. You need to be sensitive to when your early design decisions like this are helping or hindering and be willing to switch designs if necessary.

The first thing that I want to do though, is to create our basic two class structure and to discuss why we do it that way. In particular we will be making the Game class !nabstract , something that we have mentioned before but have not yet covered in any detail. Today is the day for the detail and to explain to you why you would use the abstract feature of Java.

In NetBeans create a new project and JavaApplication, games - I pluralized it because I will eventually have several games in this project. Mastermind is just the first.

Hack up the public static void main routine in the class Games to be a single <b>System.out.println("Let's play some games.");</b> and go ahead and run it to see that it prints the message.

Next use NetBeans to create a class Game and then make it abstract like this:

```java
  abstract public class Game {
  }
```

Next create a class Mastermind that extends Game

That is the framework. Now we want to add things to it.

One of the things that we think a game should have is a score and we can be fairly certain that it should be located at the Game level (shared by many games) rather than at the Mastermind level. So in Game add the member:

```java
  public int score = 0;
```

also in Game add:

```java
  abstract public void play();
```

What is that? It sure looks like a function signature (just like we have in interfaces) - it tells you everything about the function, what it returns and what arguments it takes, but it has no block which implements the function. That is what the abstract keyword does, it tells this class that there is no implementation for the function play in this class. More importantly, it declares that any Game that gets created had better have a play function. Any class that inherits from Game, inherits this play() interface and must have a play function with this signature. It tells you that you can play() any Game. At the same time it tells you that the actual way that you play any Game is going to be defined at some lower level i.e. in some subclass of Game.

 An abstract class is any class that has even a single abstract function in it. If a class tell you that it is abstract it means that the class is incomplete. Because it is incomplete, you will not be allowed create a new one of these objects. There is no constructor. You can't create a new Game() - because Game, by itself, is incomplete. However much like we did with interfaces you CAN create a variable that is of type Game. I can easily have:

```java
  Game mm = new Mastermind();
```

And then you can call

```java
  mm.play();
```

which would play the mastermind game. You can do that because by contract, every Game will implement play() somewhere in it's inheritance hierarchy.

It is important to note the difference between an interface and an abstract class. An interface is purely abstract. It is nothing but signatures - no real code. An abstract class, on the other hand, can have lots of code, maybe even the bulk of the code. It can hold everything that is common or shared between several things. In our case, we have made an abstract Game class with the notion that we will share it between multiple games, even though we are only working on one of those games, Mastermind, right at the moment. But everything that we think we could share with another game we will implement in Game. That is the advantage of an abstract class, unlike an interface it can contain code, unlike a complete class an abstract class can leave some things undefined for lower in the inheritance heirarchy. An abstract class is a partial class. When used correctly, an abstract class can hold almost everything you need with only a few unspecified features. You add those features and you are good to go.

Now as soon as we added abstract play() into Game that should have broken the class Mastermind. Go look, Mastermind is broken because it extends Game but did not implement the abstract function play(). You only have two choices, either Mastermind must itself becomes abstract (i.e. is going to defer implementation of play() a lower subclass in the chain - in which case you won't be able to construct a new Mastermind) OR Mastermind must implement play().

We are going to let NetBeans build the play() stub for you. A "stub" is a stand-in for a function. It matches the function's signature but usually just throws a message saying that you haven't gotten around to writing the real function yet. Stubs are very common during the design process. When you are thinking that you need these three function, write the stubs first, then fill them in correctly. In this case, the stubbing of an abstract function is something that NetBeans knows how to do. Just hover on the red underlined Mastermind, ALT Enter to get the choices, and select implement abstract methods. It will creates a override for the play function and implement it as a thrown exception. Now replace the exception code that it created with a better stub, the two lines:

```java
  score = 1; // you get one point for just playing this game
  System.out.println("Sweet!");
```

Granted, this is not a very interesting game. You win automatically by playing, you get one point and it prints out "Sweet!" BUT it will be easy to test this game. Also, I hope you noticed that even though score is defined over in Game, it was instantly recognized over here in Mastermind - that is of course because Mastermind inherited score from Game. That is the whole point - anything we put is Game is instantly and immediately in Mastermind. When I said that sometimes it helps to do a multi-layered design right from the start - this is the example. Even if I never build a second game, I am already thinking in layers. A general concept will go into Game, a specific one will be put in Mastermind. Mastermind will not be cluttered with General concepts like scores and rounds and averages, and similarly Game will not be cluttered with specific concepts like counting Cows and Bulls - and yet - due to inheritance, Mastermind has it all.

Let's go test our game in - Games - the class that has the <b>public static void main()</b> routine. Just create the game and play it:

```java
  Game g = new Mastermind();
  g.play();
```
 
[next: Helper Classes](Java0604.md)