## Java 1-1 Getting Starting [&GT;](Java0102.md)
# Introduction

This course is an introduction to programming which uses the language Java. We do not assume that you already know Java, we will teach Java as we go along BUT our emphasis will be on covering the topics that you need in order to understand programming as opposed to covering every feature of the Java language.

## Outline for Chapter 1
We will first have you download and install the tools that you will need for programming. You will then write HelloWorld, the program that is used to test your installations. After that the bulk of the chapter will be in explaining all the little bits of Java that were used to create that hello world program.


## Visual Studio Code and Java Developers Kit
In order to get started you will need to download and install two components: Google for and install Visual Studio Code which will be your IDE. You can either let VSC guide you through the installation of the Java compiler, the JDK that it needs, or you can just go to Oracle and install the JDK on your own.

Basically there are 3 things that are needed to write your Java code.

1. **JVM** - the Java Virtual Machine - runs Java programs. There is a good chance that this is already installed on your computer.

2. **JDK** - the Java Developers Kit - includes a "compiler" to convert Java source langage files into Java Machine codes that can run on the JVM. The compiler is what you work with to create Java programs.

3. **IDE** - Integrated Development Environment - is a combination of a program source code editor, a debugger, project management software and other things to aid in the development of software. IDEs are NOT required in order to develop Java code but it is much easier and faster with an IDE. All professional programmers use some form of IDE.

There are several different IDEs on the market like Eclipse, NetBeans, Idea. We will be using Visual Studio Code which is actually a step backwards from a Java specific IDE (It does a bit less) and yet it is a step forwards from a traditional code editor (deals well with multiple languages). 

## Directory Structure

You will want a directory structure to build your projects. Usually the shop you are working for will dictate a directory structure that they like, and often that choice is dictated by their automatic build tools. We will not be building anything so complicated in this course but we will have several projects SO we recommend creating a directory named 'projects'.

Java is what is known as an **Object Oriented** Programming language (OOP), and is built around **classes**. In a typical project you will have many different classes and typically you have a different file for each class. As a result, you will have many files associated with a single project and thus will typically collect all the classes for a project into a single directory (actually, you may have the classes spread into several sub-directories but the point is, you will usually have one directory that is assciated with one project).

So everytime you need to create a new project you will create a new subdirectory under 'projects'.

# PHOTO needed

to show How to Create/Edit Directories in VSC

note: in VSC renaming and deleting of files and folders is done by right clicking and selecting from menu. Good luck finding out how to right click on a Mac (fucking worthless toaster!). Oh sorry, my bad, of course if you use an Apple all the time you already KNOW how to right click.

Creating directories and files is done with the little icons at the top of the explorer view in VSC, but they do this BOGUS folder collapsing that is 'undiscoverable', well, very 'confusing' until you go out of your way to look it up. (and what exactly do you look up, "OK GOOGLE so how come when I create a subdirectory in a newly created directory the subdirectory isn't shown under the first directory in visual studio code." - in these days of Google developers have ABANDONED the principles of 'discoverable' design. "YO BOOMER, grovel around, watch some youTube, learn something why doncha?" - grrr)

If you create a folder Foo, the folder is created. If you select Foo and create another folder named Bar, instead of showing two lines, Foo with Bar indented under it, they show just one line Foo / Bar
because WHY use 2 lines that show the directory structure when 1 would do? 

However you can CLICK on and select either the word Foo or the word Bar in that one single line as the target for another directory creation.

If you selected Foo and create a second subdirectory, Pez, then it would unwind to show the hierarchy on 3 lines 

```text
Foo
  Bar
  Pez
```

but if you instead selected Bar and create Pez, you will see yet another collapsed directory structure.

```text
Foo / Bar / Pez
```

I will try to pretend that at some point I will grow to love this feature.


[next: First Project](Java0102.md)

