## Java 1-7 Getting Starting [&LT;](Java0106.md) [&GT;](Java0108.md)
# Visibility - public private protected

Nearly everything in Java, the classes, the variables, and the functions, have an attribute that describes how visible that element is from other places. Some authors refer to this as accessibility (the words themselves called **access modifiers**) instead of visibility.

The primary split is this:

If you declare a name **private** (in a class), that thing can be seen and accessed within that class but outside of the class no one can even see that it exists.

If you declare a name **public** (in a class) that thing is visible everywhere, and anyone can get at it.

There are two other visibility modifiers, **protected** and **default** (there is no keyword for the default - if don't use private, public, or protected you get default which is different from the other 3!). We will only rarely ever use protected which is something that is partway between private and public and has some very particular limited use. We will NEVER use the default. Default is simply a mistake in the Java system - it is yet another quasi-public-quasi-private state that has the unfortunate feature that if you DON'T tell Java what visibility some member will have, then you get the default visibility.

All good programmers (meaning my students) will ALWAYS declare a visibility for their names. This is not a requirement and is not quite a standard Java convention, it is MY convention. And it is a good habit to get into. My reasoning is this: if you did not indicate "public" or "private" for some name, it means you FORGOT to think about what you wanted. You did not actually WANT to get some fuzzy neither here nor there state, but that is what you got because you didn't think about it.

Of course, right at the moment you have no idea what you want or need at any point. This is something that will come with time, but in general here are the typical patterns:

1. classes are nearly always PUBLIC - everyone wants to see all the Types that are available.

2. variables are nearly alway PRIVATE - these are like the engine components of a car, they belong under the hood of the car. The car, the class that defined them, can get at them, but anyone else must go through the class if they want them. The exceptions will be things like steering wheels and seatbelts, that are car components but are exposed precicely so that the car user can get at them. They become part of the external interface for the car.

3. functions are always a mix, some public some private. Functions do things. Some class behaviors are exposed to the world. It is the way that the world interacts with something in the class. On the other hand, classes may need private functions or methods for doing some internal work.

So as a rule of thumb, make all your classes public, make all your variables private and for every function decide whether it should be used by everyone in the world, or for internal use only. The safe bet with functions (and everything else for that matter) is to make them private. You only make them public when you KNOW that you need them somewhere on the outside.

Do I follow that rule of thumb? NO I do not. I am a pro. What I actually do is closer to this: Everything is public, while I am writing it. This is like building a car with no hood, no body, where I have access to everything instantly. I don't waste time up front worrying about access because I often write stuff, don't like it, delete it, move it, edit it. Why waste time making something public/private when I am not even sure it is going to last for a day or even the next 20 minutes.

BUT after the code gets to be fairly big, it is time to worry about access. Then I go into the code and make nearly EVERYTHING private. I break all the connections that USED to work and then on a case by case basis I make some things public. So I make a whole bunch of access decisions all at once on thinking ONLY about access.

Is that the end? Certainly not! Time to write more code. Do I need to live with all those access decisions I made on that day of fixing access? Certainly not! I may very well take things that I made private on access day and make them public again so that I have easy access.

The point being that the access needs of a developer and a final user are probably different, and not only that, are what you ultimately want is difficult to determine until you get rather far along in a project. 

So do what's easy but do make sure that you at least occasionally shake up the accessibility of your code.

Next up we look at **function signatures**

[next: Functions & Expressions](Java0108.md)