## Java 1-2 Getting Starting [&LT;](Java0101.md) [&GT;](Java0103.md)
# First Project 

## Hello World
Ever since the K&R White Book for C, every one that teaches a programming language starts out with a program named 'Hello World' that just prints out that message. 

We will comply with that tradtion and name our first project 'hello' so create a sub-directory in 'Projects' with that name. 

The actual purpose of this project is to TEST whether you have correctly installed the compiler and have it working properly with your IDE.

So in the 'hello' directory that you just created create a file named 'Hello.java' and copy and paste this code into that file

```java
package projects.hello;

class Hello{
  public static void main(String[] args){
    System.out.println("Hello, World!");
  }
}
```
# PHOTO needed
to show how to run code in VSC. 

Well too bad for you. No Photo. In the one single week between when I wrote this down as a first draft, and before I got around to taking a screen shot, VSC has changed the way that they let you run your java code. 

If I had spent ANY time actually documenting where the button is it would already be out of date. Disgusting! So yeah, look around and find the little triangle shaped 'PLAY' button and click that to either run your code or maybe it will open up a menu that will let you run your code.

When I run it I get this mess displayed in a terminal window.

```text
Windows PowerShell
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Try the new cross-platform PowerShell https://aka.ms/pscore6

PS C:\Users\Marlin\Documents\GitHub\VSC2021>  & 'c:\Users\Marlin\.vscode\extensions\vscjava.vscode-java-debug-0.35.0\scripts\launcher.bat' 'C:\Program Files\Java\jdk-16.0.1\bin\java.exe' 
'--enable-preview' '-XX:+ShowCodeDetailsInExceptionMessages' '-Dfile.encoding=UTF-8' '-cp' 'C:\Users\Marlin\AppData\Roaming\Code\User\workspaceStorage\6d1c49adc86f5fdb18d9d7c23f000ee9\redhat.java\jdt_ws\VSC2021_898ae76b\bin' 'sandbox_Marlin.projects.hello.Hello'
Hello, World!
PS C:\Users\Marlin\Documents\GitHub\VSC2021> 
```

Had I been using an IDE that did NOT proudly show me all the garbage that they had to stuff into the shell to run the java I would have just seen

```text
Hello, World!
```

Congratulations. Your code doesn't do much yet, but it does run! (and now you know where the run button is.)

We will explain the code that we wrote in the next section. But right now, before we go further, I want you to change some broken defaults in the IDE.

The last icon in the left hand panel of VSC is the GEAR icon used for settings. OOPS - they removed that last week as well. 

Wade into the file menu, maybe under preferences you can get into the settings, search for tabs and set the tabs width to be 2 instead of 4.

[next: Comments](Java0103.md)
