## Java 2-3 Structured Data [&LT;](Java0202.md) [&GT;](Java0204.md)
# Override toString
==Override toString()

When I ran the test code I got:

```text
  Testing Person
  hello.Person@4a5ab2
```

This the output that I got. Yours was probably different (a different number after Person). What is going on here?

Well, the println function is often used and is pretty special. It wants to print out a String and that is the only thing that it wants to print out. When you handed it something that came from a class that it did not know, like Person, it asked the Person class if it knew how to convert a Person to a String.

Well, WE never wrote a function in the Person class that would convert a Person to a String, so Java rummaged through something known as the **class hierarchy** and found the default 'toString()' function and used that.

The default 'toString()' function is the only thing that makes sense for absolutely any object. It will print the object's Type, in this case 'Person', and it will tell you where that Person object is located in the computer's memory which on my machine on that particular day it was '@4a5ab2'. On your machine it will be located somewhere else mostly wherever it could find space.

Now this is not a particularly useful chunk of information about a Person. I mean the Person has a name and age, why not list that instead? That is what we are going to do next and it is something that you will <i>almost always do with every class you create</i> so that your class will print out some useful information when you use println on that type of object.

The function signature that println is looking for is a public function named 'toString()'. The function returns a String, (no real surprise there) so we now want to go back to the Person class and add a function

```java
  $Override
  public String toString(){return "dude named: " + last + ", " + first ;}
```

This is the first time you have seen String addition. The way you **concatenate** two strings is by adding them together with plus signs. We glued four strings together: (did you see them?) Some were Literal strings (text wrapped in quotes) and others were the string variables, first and last,

The 4 strings were:
    1.  "dude named: "
    2.  last // a variable which we said would be a String.
    2.  ", " // a comma and a space to seperate last from first
    2.  first // another variable that we declared as a String.

The other piece that you have never seen is that '@Override' annotation. 

What we are doing here is "overriding" the default behavior of toString(). There was already a toString() defined and we are overriding that with a new version. We knew at the time that we wrote the function that we wanted to override - in fact the only reason that we are doing this is so that we can println out a Person. 

The @Override annotation is NOT required. It is there only to express your intentions to override and to help you detect a possible bug.

Suppose I had misspelled my function name. Suppose I accidentally typed "tooString()" - well, there is certainly no error in derining a function with that name. As far as Java is concerned you wanted a function named "tooString" and then when you try to println it looks for "toString" doesn't find it, so it gets the default... And you sit there wondering why your "tooString" function isn't doing the right thing never noticing that you misspelled it.

The point is, when you KNOW you are building an override, you should tell the system that you are building an override and if it detects that you didn't override anything it can warn you.

With that override annotation in place try to change the function to 'tooString' and watch your IDE detect that that spelling is NOT overriding anything. 

The reason there is an @ sign in front of Override (and none of the other keywords in java have an @ in front) is because it was added AFTER the language was frozen. oops! If we just add a new keyword "override" which we should have had from day one we might break some old application somewhere in the world that was using the word override for some other purpose - what are we gonna do? We'll just build in a kludge. We don't use @ signs for anything, that won't break anything. We'll put in an annotation system so programmers can pass special messages to compilers and IDEs.

Sorry for the long discussion, but not really. You need to know when you ARE overriding and when you ARE NOT overriding existing functions in a class. In fact, it is often exactly what you want to do just like we are doing right now, so I'll say it again.

You almost always want to override 'toString' in every class that you build.

Now let's go run Hello and see how the System.out.println now runs differently due to the change we made in the Person class.

## Person 1.1

```java
==Person.java
  package hello;
  
   public class Person {
     public String first;
     public String last;
     public int age;
     
     @Override
     public String toString(){return "dude named: " + last + ", " + first ;}
   }
```

[next: Assignment](Java0204.md)