## Java 8-13 Swing [&LT;](Java0812.md) [&GT;](Java0901.md)
# Summary
==Summary
We have shown how Java uses listeners in order to capture mouse events. We did not cover Keyboard listeners but they do work in basically the same way. I recommend that you look them up. I assure you that the only trick will be where to install the listener and once you have installed it your code will get called every time someone presses a key or releases a key on the keyboard. 

So with these last two chapters on Swing describing how you do graphic output and how you collect input from the mouse we have done only the most rudimentary coverage of Swing. You should not consider yourself an expert in Swing and indeed, I do not consider myself an expert in any way, shape or form. The list of things that I have NOT covered far exceeds that material that I HAVE covered. I have completely ignored those portions that most people would consider absolutely essential. For example I did not show you how to create a menu bar, a menu item, a dialog box, or how to put radio buttons onto a page. I have not discussed layout managers.

The reason I have limited my discussion is because I know so little. I learned enough Swing to do everything that I wanted. I know, if I ever find myself interested in building a Swing application I can read the tutorials and build a menu bar. In fact I did do just that at one time but have since forgotten because I don't do it often enough to need to recall it. I do build swing applications, but since I am not writing applications for clients I do not for the most part need or want menus and dialogs. I know that if I was building an application to ship to someone I would need a file menu and a way to open files, and save files, and saveAs and possibly print - but if I am just doing an experiment to see if some UI effect will work I don't need to spend time building dialogs. Most of my software career was spent as a manager. I had people working for me that could write SaveAs dialogs - I spent most of my time worrying about what the overall design and features of an application would look like (and worrying about whether my people were actually getting the product closer to shipping!) so the code I wrote tended to be experimental. I write code to help me think about things.

If you have further interest in Swing my advice would be to go to Oracle's web site and read their swing tutorials and work through some of their examples. Things could have changed but it used to take less than an hour to skim though all their materials. This will also not make you an expert but it will expose you to the names of some of the classes and give you an idea of how you can do many of the more traditional GUI things.

You have reached a milestone in this course. We have now covered nearly all of the basics of the Java Language. We have introduced most of the keywords and presumably by repeated usage you are now familiar with the notions of variables, functions, classes, interfaces, why you might make things abstract or not, why make something static or not, why make something public or private. You know what arrays are, you have seen Maps and Strings. We have shown some generics. Yes, there are many other things that we could/should cover. We have done no functional programming (something introduced in Java 8 after I started writing this tutorial), and I haven't shown any serialization or regular expressions. So many things, so little time! None the less, you can quit at this point and reasonably and honestly claim that you know Java.

Typically most introductory courses in programming would stop here. They have taught you the language, they showed you the paint box, so now go out an paint something, anything. However in my opinion knowing about paint is different from being a painter, and the fact that you can reasonably claim that you "know" Java, does not mean that you know how to program. Yes, you already know more than most people will ever learn and you should feel good about that accomplishment but where we want to go now is to introduce you to something on a different scale from our previous examples.

The analogy that I like to use at this point is to mention the business of building construction. In many ways learning the Java language is a bit like learning about construction materials. We have showed you wood, and nails and brick and cement. We did this all in a context by having you build little toy projects like a shed or an outhouse or a driveway so that you could use those building materials. So you have learned to nail some wood together and mix a little cement. This is a long LONG way from being an architect and knowing how to design and build a house, and it is even further from building a 10 story office building let alone a sky-scraper or a hydro-electric dam.

[next: Chapter 9](Java0901.md)