## Java 7-4 Disk Files [&LT;](Java0703.md) [&GT;](Java0705.md)
# Sorting

Now we are ready to sort our ArrayList. A quick google of (java sort array) reminds us that in order to sort an array you use a utility class that has a function in it for sorting arrays. It also reminds us that there is a separate utility class for sorting collections. Well an ArrayList is a collection, not an array so we will want the Collections.sort() utility.

From its name - Collections.sort() - it sure looks like sort is a static function in the Collections class, meaning that we don't need to first create some Collections object in order to use it - the sort routine just lives in the class itself. So we will want to call

```java
  Collections.sort(lines);
```

from somewhere inside of our TextLines class. So lets build a function sort in the textlines class, that we could call from Liz_n_Dick to sort the list.

```java
  public void sort(){Collections.sort(lines);}
```

Hack up Liz_n_Dick so that it creates the TextLines object, then sorts it, and then shows it.

```java
  TextLines t = new TextLines("MaleNames.txt");
  t.sort();
  t.show();
```

Did it work? Seems to have sorted the names on my machine. Of course as soon as it did I decide that I don't want to see the list twice, first in unsorted order when I loaded it in and then again after it was sorted so I am going to remove the sort that lives in the constructor.

By the way, did you notice the little light bulb that NetBeans marked on the show() line that was sitting in the constructor? I didn't until just now when I went to remove it. What was it telling us? It was warning us that we were calling a function, show, from inside the constructor. Technically, show is an overridable function. This means that someone could create a subclass of our TextLines object, override the show function, and screw up the way that our TextLines construction was working. We have introduced a potential leak in our TextLines class.

Do we care? In this case, No. We are just learning to write code and no one is going to be overriding our classes but us. Secondly, that show line is just in there for debugging and we planned to rip it out all along. However, it is nice that our IDE warned us of a potential flaw. It might have been perhaps a bit better if I had actually noticed the warning lights when my IDE popped them up in the dashboard rather than just ignoring them automatically. It shows that I have gotten used to just writing code for myself rather than for production in a professional shop.

However, this is as good a time as any to mention the fix. Suppose you do want to call a function from your constructor and you DON'T want to let some subclass override it - what do you do? To block overrides you declare the function final. I think we have used that term before what I was creating constants.

You can use the keyword final in the signature for either a variable or for a function. A variable that is declared final, means that you get to initialize the variable exactly once and that is it. You are never afterwards allowed to change a final variable. Similarly, a final function can't be overridden. You may even be able to declare an entire class final, I'd need to google and see. final is the way that you lock something down and make it unchangeable.

Java uses this internally in a very interesting place, the String class. Strings are final. A string object is final. You can create a string variable foo, and change it all you want, but the actual string "Hello" that you shoved into your variable foo cannot be altered. Not only is the String itself locked down but the class is too. (OK so I don't need to google, I am remembering, you must be able to declare a class final). You are not allowed to extend the String class. WHY? This was done primarily to enhance sharing - and you may need to do this yourself to your own classes at some point in the future.

Consider two different chunks of code that are sharing a String. If one chunk changes the string, because it is shared it is instantly changed for the other code as well. Suppose the string was in a sorted array somewhere, and some chunk of code changes the actual string, then suddenly that array is no longer sorted. Basically if you share strings and they are NOT constant unchanging globs, then you are living in a world where you must constantly notify any other users of a String that you altered it. You would need some system of notification. On the other hand, if everyone agrees to play in a world where Strings are NEVER allowed to change. You can hand a string out to someone and NEVER need to worry that they will screw with it. ReadOnly Strings have some advantages in terms of sharing over ReadWrite Strings. 

In da early days of code everyone worked with ReadWrite strings. They were just variables by default, and people had to deal with notification problems as soon as they moved to multi-user systems. Then someone observed that those problems go away if you can live with ReadOnly Strings i.e. immutable strings. As a result most modern languages, Java included, make their fundamental Strings immutable. Not that you care, but the Cedar system at Xerox in the 60s, used immutable strings in their system and they gave them a different name, Ropes, in order to emphasize that they were NOT yer standard mutable String. The advantages of immutability were so great that modern languages incorporated that right into the String package and now Strings are generally immutable and there is no need for a different name. 

Certainly, Strings wouldn't have to work this way, and in fact Java has things like StringBuffer which implement mutable strings. You would use this class when the whole purpose of your app is to shuffle around the characters in a string, but the default String class is intended to be immutable so it is final. The entire class needs to be made final so that some tricky person does not subclass String with a new class SubvertableString - put in overrides that allowed them to screw with the values of the string and then hand you one of these objects claiming that it was just a String (remember inheritance, I can hand you a HashMap and tell you that it is just a Map - you don't even see the extra stuff hanging off that made it a HashMap. It would be a security flaw if I allowed some other process to hand me a String, which I am going to write to a file, I check that the String does not cause a security violation and then - behind my back - that other process who knew that it was actually a SubvertableString changed the value after I had declared it OK but before I wrote it off to the secure location. So Strings are immutable in Java and the String class if final.

Sorry for the long digression. It is something that you will eventually need to know and it just came up here.

As I was saying if we wanted to fix the leak in the constructor we could leave the call to show() in the constructor and just declare show as final like this:

```java
  public final void show(){...}
```

instead, we will just remove it since we don't want our constructor blathering all the time. If I had been thinking clearly, I would never have put show() in the constructor, I should have put it in Liz_n_Dick right after I had done the construction. Then my constructor would be clear of debug code and the debugging would be being done in the right place. So it goes.

Back to our sorting issue. Did it sort the way we wanted? Not really. It just put them in alphabetical order. I had a different ordering in mind. I wanted to see the shortest names first.

When we look in the Collections class (I mean looking at the API documentation) we see that in addition to a sort(list) method there is also a sort(list, comparator) method. The comparator object allows you to redefine the way that you compare two objects, so I could declare that any name that is shorter than some other name than it actually is less than the other name. This is NOT the natural alphabetical ordering which declares that the long name ABRAHAM comes before the short name BEN.

We will want to expose that other form of sorting as well in TextLines so let's add the method:

```java
  public void sort(Comparator<String> comparator){Collections.sort(lines, comparator);}
```

this alternative method of sort will let us call the alternative method in the Collections class.

Now over in the Liz_n_Dick class we will need to create a comparator object. We will need a class to create that comparator object and once again this doesn't seem to need a high level class so we will build an inner class, ShortName, whose only purpose is to let us sort things with the short names to the front of the list.

```java
  private static class ShortName implements Comparator{
    ...
  }
```

We type in those lines, fixup the name Comparator to get the definition from the util package and let NetBeans implement the methods for us so that we can fix them up.

The method that it creates is

```java
  public int compare(Object o1, Object o2) {
```

And when we look at the documentation for Comparator objects we see that the int which this method is suppose to return should be

  0.  negative if o1 is less than o2
  
  2.  zero if o1 equals o2
 
  2.  positive if o1 is greater than o2

OK - that looks good but it exposes a problem - before we can implement this we will need to be able to tell how long the name is. Normally you would think, you can just get the length of the String, but in our case the String is not just a name like JAMES, instead the String is a long thing with names and numbers and rank like JAMES 3.812 3.812 1

What we want to know is how long just the name portion of the string is. Fortunately in the String class for Java there are a bunch of helper routines that you will use all the time when you do String processing. I would recommend that you read the String class Documentation as some point so that you can see them all. No need to do that now, I will just mention a few as we get to them. In particular the useful one that we need right now is indexOf(). This function will help you located a substring within a string. So for example if you call.

```java
  int k = "Fatcat".indexOf("cat");
```

k will be set to 3 (0 would be the location of "F", 1 would be the location of "a", 2 would be the location of "t", and 3 is the location of the "c" that starts the substring cat.) If it did not find "cat" k would be -1.

So if we look for the space character that follows the name on each line that should give us the length of the actual name portion of the string. HOWEVER there is a potential problem. We can't tell by looking at this file whether the file was written using space characters of using tab characters. How can we quickly find out which it is?

The method that occurred to me was to chop up our show() method to show not only the string, but also the index of the first tab character in the string (I made the assumption that the file was written with tab characters)

so rewrite show like this

```java
  public void show(){
    for(String k : lines){
      int i = k.indexOf("\t"); // \t is the representation of a single tab character
      System.out.println(i + " " + k );
    }
  }
```

Run the code to see the numbers printed in front of each name - what I saw was a whole bunch of -1 indicating that the tab character was not found. Try it again with a single space. Suddenly I am seeing numbers that look like the length of the names in front. So I hop over to the ShortName class in Liz_n_Dick and since I am going to need to extract the name length from each string I write a function to do that:

```java
  private int len(String s){return s.indexOf(" ");}
```

The other thing that I am going to need in my sorting is that within that group of names that are all the same length, I want to put top ranked names higher. This means that I need to be able to extract the rank portion of the String (that is the number at the end) and be able to compare them numerically. Since my rank numbers are small, only 5 digits at most, I can just extract the last 5 characters of the String as a substring and then call a routine to convert that into an integer. I create another function in ShortName to do this:

```java
  private int rank(String s){return Integer.parseInt( s.substring(s.length() - 5).trim() );}
```

Working from the inside out. substring is the function that extracts a substring from string. so s.substring(k) takes a single integer k and returns everything from the kth character to the end of the string. We want to the k to be backed up 5 characters from the end of the string so the argument to substring will be s.length() - 5. Once we have that substring, we want to convert the string into an integer (There is a difference between the string "356" which is 3 characters that happen to be digits - and the number 356.) There is a helper routine in the class Integer that can extract integers from strings. This business of extracting/understanding something from text is called "parsing" so the name of this helper function is Integer.parseInt(text) - it will parse one integer from the text string and return the value to you.

When I tried to run it, the way I described it, it failed. It failed because I was handing it a string like "    43" with a leading space and that confused it. Sorry, I need to hand parseInt a "trimmed" string. trim() is a function in the String class that will trim off the leading and trailing "white space characters" from a string. It will convert " 43" into "43". So that explains all the pieces in that rank function. substring the last 5 characters from the string, trim that, parse an integer out of that and return the integer.

Only one mistake left to fix. MAGIC NUMBERS!

OK - Fine - define a constant

```java
  private int RANK_LOC = 5;
```

and change the rank function to use the constant. (If this seems needlessly pedantic, let me remind you - when you go to run this on the family names file later, did we have the right number in there? Is it really 5 or should it be 6? It is always safer to do it right.)

Now with those two helper functions, len(s) and rank(s) we are ready to write the compare function. It will look like this: 

```java
  public int compare(Object o1, Object o2) {       
  String s1 = (String) o1; String s2 = (String) o2; // cast objects to String       
    if(len(s1) == len(s2)){        
      return rank(s1) - rank(s2);       
    } else {         
      return len(s1) - len(s2);      
    }     
  }
```

The first thing that we do is cast the first two objects into Strings. The compare interface was designed to work with any object, but in our case we know that the only objects that we will be passing in will be strings. So we define String variables, cast the objects into Strings and then can perform string functions on those string variables (Note: IF by some miracle those objects o1 and o2 were NOT actually strings, the cast would actively fail at the moment that we performed it and the program would halt.) Casting is a form of active type checking. What, you don't believe me? Test me. Write some code that casts a non-string to a string and see what happens. Don't take my word for it. Seriously, only your computer knows what it will and will not do. I am probably long dead as you read this. Who knows how computers work now. Test Early. Test Often. Pack your own Chute. It's your life, not mine.

Once we have strings I can use my two helper functions. If the two strings have the same length, I want to determine the ordering of the strings by the rank difference. Subtraction is a convenient way to do this. Notice: if rank1 is less then rank2 then rank1 - rank2 goes negative. If the ranks are equal the subtraction returns zero and if rank1 is greater the subtraction returns a positive value. On the other hand, if the lengths were NOT the same, then I want to base the ordering on the length and so I do the same subtraction trick.

---
## Liz_n_Dick.java 1.1

```java
  package liz_n_dick;
  
  import java.io.IOException;
  import java.util.Comparator;
  
  public class Liz_n_Dick {
  
    public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException {
      TextLines t = new TextLines("MaleNames.txt");
      t.sort(new ShortName());
      t.show();
    }
  
    private static class ShortName implements Comparator{
      int RANK_LOC = 5; // rank is last 5 characters of string
      @Override
      public int compare(Object o1, Object o2) {
        String s1 = (String) o1; String s2 = (String) o2; // cast objecst to String
        if(len(s1) == len(s2)){
          return rank(s1) - rank(s2);
        } else {
          return len(s1) - len(s2);
        }
      }
  
      private int len(String s){return s.indexOf(" ");}
      private int rank(String s){return Integer.parseInt(s.substring(s.length() - RANK_LOC).trim());}
    }
  }
  ```
  
## Textlines.java

```java
  package liz_n_dick;
  
  import java.io.BufferedReader;
  import java.io.FileReader;
  import java.io.IOException;
  import java.util.ArrayList;
  import java.util.Collections;
  import java.util.Comparator;
  
  /** TextLines is a utility that will slurp up a text file and convert it to
   * an ArrayList of String, one for each line. This will allow us to do any
   * sort of processing of the lines including sorting them. Presumably, after
   * processing the lines, you would write a new file.
   */
  public class TextLines {
    public ArrayList<String> lines = new ArrayList<>();
  
    public TextLines(String inputFile) throws IOException {
      String line;
      BufferedReader in = new BufferedReader(new FileReader(inputFile));
      while((line = in.readLine()) != null){lines.add(line);}
      in.close();
    }
  
    public void show(){
      for(String k : lines){
        System.out.println(k);
      }
    }
  
    public void sort(){Collections.sort(lines);}
    public void sort(Comparator<String> comparator){Collections.sort(lines, comparator);}
  }
```

[next: File Output](Java0705.md)