## Java 1-5 Getting Starting [&LT;](Java0104.md) [&GT;](Java0106.md)
# Names - Requirements & Conventions 

Names are one of the best tools that humans have ever developed for organizing things. We generally have two types of name, one being proper names for specific objects like "Bob" or "Fido" or "The Empire State building" and the other being the generic name for a type of object or a class of object like "dog" or "mountain" or "partially hydrogenated soy bean oil." 

In programming we have the same type of split, where some of the names that we create are for classes or types of things, like "StringOfText" or "Person" or "Mp3AudioFile" (and I hope that you are not too surprised that I capitalized those like we do for all class names in Java) and some are names for specific objects like "errorMessage5" or "bob" or "beatles_Yesterday".

sidebar: Notice that the capitalization convention of English and Java are exactly reversed. In English, Fido is a specific dog. In Java, fido is a specific Dog. 

When you are organizing material in a program, you will be creating names for the things that you are building. Some of the names will be for **variables** (places that you can store something), some will be names of **functions** (code that does something to variables), and some are class names, which define **types** of objects that you can create.

Example: You are creating some sort of payroll accounting system and you may well need to talk about Employees, Wages, BankAccounts, OvertimePolicies. These would be the types of things that you would deal with and would probably become classes in your system. In general the names for your classes should be singular rather than plural - you would want an Employee class and NOT an Employees class. The Employee class would tell you properties that are common to all Empolyees, like that they have names, and id numbers, and wages, and job titles, and working hours and accumulated vacation time.

It is probably good to point out the difference between classes and objects. Classes are essentially blueprints (or factories) for creating objects. Objects are the things that you work with - they hold your data. A movie (an object) will be something like Casablanca or  Star Wars, a single individual thing, full of data. A Movie (capitalized, therefore a class, therefore a datatype) on the otherhand is a class that describes the properties of all Movies, like they they have a title, a run time, a list of actors, a box office gross. Those features, 'title', etc are defined in a class - for example the class tell us that 'title' is a String and that 'runtime' is a number - but those things are features (fields, members) of a single movie object. It is a movie object that has a 'title' and a 'list of actors', it is not the class that has a 'title' and a 'list of actors'. A single dog (an object) has ears, the class of dogs, the blueprint for making a single dog does not actually have ears - it merely had the description of what ears are so that you can construct them for a single dog.

However before we get into any more details about classes, variables, or functions let's just talk about one of the things that they all have in common which is names.

Names can be pretty much any string of letters (and digits and underscores). There are both some requirements for names and some conventions.

## Requirements

1. A name must start with a letter or a $, _, etc. but NOT a digit. After that first letter, you can follow with any combination of letters, digits and underscores.
2. A name can NOT be a reserved Java word. i.e. you can not use the name 'class' or 'public' or 'package' or any of the other 50 or so **keywords** in the Java language. I will show a complete list at the end of this lesson.

## Conventions

1. Do NOT start your variable names with a dollarsign or an underscore. It is legal but don't do it. These were defined as legal to allow machines to write code that would not interefere with human written code. So machines get to use those characters but you do NOT.

2. A class name (or an interface name or an enum name) must start with an upper case letter followed by any legal characters.

2. Any other name, variables or functions should start with a lowercase letter UNLESS it is a constant (see convention #5).

2. CamelCase is the preferred style. It is called CamelCase because it has humps like a camel, a mixture of upper and lower case. The brief sidebar is this: sometimes we need a name like 'the Empire State building" - however spaces are not allowed in names so we must ram the words all together. In da good ole days people would use upper case letters (sometimes because that's all there was on their computer system) and they would use underscore as the separator so you would talk about THE_EMPIRE_STATE_BUILDING. When Bell Labs was working on the C language and the Unix operating system, they had keyboards with both upper and lower case but with no underscore (or so I've been told) and hence they adopted the CamelCaseConventionWhereYou run the words together like that indicating the start of each new word with a capital letter. And if you want to be correct in your CamelCase, when you happen to use a name like IBM or CIA or HTML that is all capitalized because it is an acronym, you obliterate the acronym capitalization convention and talk about CiaFavoriteColor, not CIAFavoriteColor.

2. CamelCase is preferred BUT has one exception. Constants. Normally when you have a variable like "x" it can hold any value. But sometimes you want to mark a place that holds only one single specific value like the number PI = 3.14159. When you have a constant, in order to emphasize that it is a constant and NEVER going to change we SHOUT it in all caps (and because we can't see word breaks in all caps we go back to using the underscore to split the words - because hey, we don't have cheap teletype machines with no underscores on them no more)

So there you go.

"Person" is clearly a class (or interface or enum) all of which define Types of objects.

"dude" is some kind of variable or function (though if it was a function it would probably be written dude() with parentheses to show you that it was a function)

"76Trombones" is not a name because you can't start with a digit.

"theEmpireStateBuilding" is probably a variable name just like "dude"

"THE_EMPIRE_STATE_BUILDING" is also most likely a variable BUT it probably has a value that never changes.

The difference between requirement and convention is probably fairly clear. Requirements are required. The compiler will NOT compile the program and let it run if you don't follow the requirements. Java will just not know what you mean. Conventions on the other hand, are NOT requirements and you could in theory NOT follow them and Java will not complain. However your IDE might complain and your co-workers will almost certainly complain.

Conventions are things like driving on the right hand side of the road; if we all do it that way we will all get along much better. Conventions should not be tossed away without some good reason.

In this course, I will try to be careful and indicate the difference between things that are required, things that are conventional, and things that are MY convention.

## Java Keywords

Now here is your list of java keywords:

<b>abstract assert boolean break byte case catch char continue class const default do double else enum extends final finally float for goto if implements import instanceof int interface long native new package private protected public return short static strictfp super switch synchronized this throw throws transient try void volatile while</b>

These same keywords are listed in the back of the book in an Appendix, and they are listed in a more convenient order, grouped by structural type. You can look at them now if you wish, though I don't expect you to understand any of that structure yet. We have already learned 2 of these keywords, "package" and "class", only 48 to go.

[next: Variables](Java0106.md)