## Java 1-9 Getting Starting [&LT;](Java0108.md) [&GT;](Java0110.md)
# String Literals 

Wow! We have reached a milestone. I have mostly finished explaining all the junk that you MUST have (which does absolutely NOTHING) when you build that first class in a project. 

The body (the BLOCK, the implementation) of your main routine for the Hello World program is the single line:

```java
  System.out.println("Hello, World!");
```

of course the entire function properly declared and indented looks like this:

```java
  public static void main(String[] args){
    System.out.println("Hello, World!");
  }
```

When I run this program I see this mess:
```text
 c:; cd 'c:\Users\Marlin\Documents\GitHub\VSC2021'; & 'c:\Users\Marlin\.vscode\extensions\vscjava.
 vscode-java-debug-0.35.0\scripts\launcher.bat' 'C:\Program Files\Java\jdk-16.0.1\bin\java.exe'
  '--enable-preview' '-XX:+ShowCodeDetailsInExceptionMessages' '-Dfile.encoding=UTF-8' '-cp'
   'C:\Users\Marlin\AppData\Roaming\Code\User\workspaceStorage\6d1c49adc86f5fdb18d9d7c23f000ee9\red
   hat.java\jdt_ws\VSC2021_898ae76b\bin' 'aaIntroPuzzles.hello.Hello' 
Hello, World!
```

This is disgusting! 

It makes me immediatly want to swtich back to a REAL Java specific IDE like NetBeans or Idea where the output is UNCLUTTERED with all that GARBAGE that VSC STUFFED off to PowerShell to invoke the compiler and the runtime. 

But, no, getting used to disgusting tools that pretend that they are better than anything previously developed is part of being a programmer. We will NOT rant at VSC. We will accept it and grow to LOVE it. 

Sorry, moving right along -

Look! Soo cool! You have output your first words.

So let me explain that line of code that we added. Looking at that line you should be able to tell that 'System' is a class, because it is capitalized, and indeed it is. The System class holds a bunch of general information about your computer system and the Java Virtual Machine that you are running. In particlar the System class has a variable named 'out' that is attached to the System class. (We haven't covered static variables yet, but static is the magic word that attaches a variable to a class so the astute observer would also note that out MUST be a static variable.)

Anyway 'out' happens to be an 'OutputStream' type object, meaning that it is something that knows how to stream output text off somewhere. In our case, 'out' is pointing to the little output window that VSC used for running PowerShell. That is why your message showed up there rather than on a printer somewhere or in a file.

OutputStream objects like 'out' understand the function 'println'. In particular 'println' is a function that takes a single String argument and shoves that String to the OutputStream. So in our case the String, "Hello, World!", ends up on the terminal window.

Just for the record, the 'ln' on the end of the function name stands for "line". (You can pronounce it however you like. In my head I hear "printlun.") This print function puts an entire line out and automatically supplies the carriage return at the end for you. There is another function that OutputStreams understand which is 'print'. It is just like 'println' but does NOT add a carriage return.

## String Literals

I hope that you noticed that the quotes that you used around the phrase 'Hello, World!' in your code did NOT show up in the output. That is because the quotes were delimiters in the Java language for a 'String literal'. This is how Java represents a particular string value.  

In my examples of variables you saw me shoving 'literal numbers' into integer variables with a line like:

```text
int x = 13;         // 13 is a 'literal number
String y = "13"     // "13" is a literal String
```

The quotes show where the String value starts and where it ends. And there is a problem lurking there.

How do you actually output quotation marks? I mean, if a double-quote is a delimiter, how does Java know that you actually want that quote character inside your String? This is known as the 'embedded quote' problem and it shows up in **any** language that uses quotes as String delimiters.

The solution that Java used (and that C and C++ and C# and many modern languages use but which is not the only way) is to introduce an escape character. The escape character that they introduced was backslash.

If we try to write a string with quotes in it in this way:

```text
  "We use the word, "foo," to mean a thing with no name."
```

That double quote right before the word 'foo' ends the Literal String value, and Java then wonders what all that extra junk left on the line was.

So to prevent a 'literal' quote from being interpreted as delimiter and to force it to be in the String we put an escape character in front:

```text
  "We use the word, \"foo,\" to mean a thing with no name."
```

There you go, the problem of embedded quotes - Solved! Sounds good except that we have now introduced a new problem. 

Backslash used to be just a literal backslash character, but now we are interpreting it as an escape character. What if we want a literal backslash in the string? 

Well, you just use the backslash to escape a backslash - so if you want one backslash to show up on the screen you must type two. The first one is the escape and the one immediately after the escape is dropped into the string as a literal backslash.

```text
  "Hey look, one backslash \\"
```

And now that Java has an escape character we can use it for other things as well. Java uses **\t** to drop a Tab character into a string. It uses **\n** to drop a NewLine (carriage return or line feed) into a string. There are probably other escapes as well. So we could/should modify our code to be:

```java
  System.out.println("Hello,\n\t\t\"World\"!");
```

Which if you try it out should print - 'Hello,', followed by a newLine then two tabs then the word '"World!"' with the quotes around World appearing.

--Homework time:

Make your hello program print out several different messages to be sure that you understand how to deal with escape characters.

--Assignment 1 - make it print
```text
  Dude, did you see "Endless Summer"?
```

--Assignment 2 - make it print

```text
  a 
  b
  c
```

Hint: do this two different ways. 
Once using only one 'println', and the other using 3 'println' statements

--Assignment 3
```text
  Are you $*\@"ing kidding me?
```
--Assignment 4
```text
  Sure is easier if there is nothing to escape.
```

--Assignment 5

Set it back to normal output when you are done playing around.

[next: Chapter 1 Summary](Java0110.md)