## Java 1-8 Getting Starting [&LT;](Java0107.md) [&GT;](Java0109.md)
# Functions & Expressions

A function signature is the single line that starts off the definition of a function. In addition to defining the name of the function, it tells you its visibility, its arguments, what type of thing it returns, whether or not it throws exceptions and things like that. 

sidebar- Technically the 'signature' is just the name of the function, the return type, and the TYPES of the arguments - the 'signature' is the part that the COMPILER cares about so that it can tell when you CALL a function which one it was supposed to use. The other parts of the function declaration, like the names of the parameters and the visibility are not technically part of the signature. 

None the less, no one will be confused if you call the line where you declared and defined a function the 'function signature'. Signatures were important back in the stone Ages of C, when people were building things called '1 pass compilers' because input from cards was so slow. I will therfore cheerfully continue to mangle the language slightly and call the line where you declare a function and declare ALL of its many properties to be the function signature.

The general layout for a function is this:
```java
  visibility modifiers returnType name(Type1 arg1, Type2 arg2){ implementation_code_in_here } 
```

Visibility as I just mentioned can be public, private, protected, or left blank but use of either blank or protected is discouraged for now. 

There are several possible modifiers:

```text
  static abstract final native strictfp synchronized transient volatile
```

I think that is all of them. I have never needed to use any of the last five and so I will not be teaching them. The first three on the other hand are used ALL the time and I listed them in decreasing order of importance.

At this point you should be able to mostly decode the line in Hello World where we defined the function main:

```java
  public static void main(String[ ] args){
```

As you can see, the visibility was 'public', it had a 'static' modifier, the return type is 'void' - which means it doesn't actually return anything and the name of the function was 'main' (note the lower case first letter that we always use for functions). This function takes a single argument named 'args' (note the lower case letter that we always use for variables - an argument is just a variable passed into a function) The type of the variable args is String[ ] - an array of Strings (and 'String' MUST be a class name because it was capitalized - and indeed it is a class and therefore a type - it tells you what type of thing that variable args is allowed to hold.)

This particular function signature is special. **YOU SHOULD MEMORIZE IT!** Say it to yourself a few times: "public static void main string brack args" it must be capitalized just like above i.e. String is the ONLY cap. You must have those parens and the open and close bracket. Technically, you could change the word args to any other legal variable name but no one ever does, because this particular function signature is an idiom of the Java language.

It is an idiom because it is REQUIRED that within a Java project, which can have many different classes, there MUST be at least one class that defines a <i>public static void</i> function named "<i>main</i>" which takes a single argument that is an <i>array of String</i> - because that special function is where your program will start.

When you run a Java program you just click on the little triangle 'PLAY' button in your IDE. That's 'cause you are a software developer. When you eventually learn to package up your program into a .jar file (that is how Java ships a whole bunch of classes that make up a complete program) so that someone else can run your program on their machine, your .jar file will have a marker in it indicating WHICH class is your starting class, and that class MUST have a public static void main(String[] args) function defined within it or your program can't run.

Check it out. Open up the Hello file and edit the main function so that it is named something else like "maine" - this is not an error. The java Compiler is quite happy to have classes with no "main" function. But try to run it. The runtime does not know where to start your code.

So change it back to 'main'.

[next: String Literals](Java0109.md)