## Java 3-1 Interfaces and Contracts [&LT;](Java0208.md) [&GT;](Java0302.md)
# Polymorphism

ObjectOriented code is all about polymorphism. What does this mean? Literally "polymorphism" means many shapes. The idea is that we will allow different classes to implement different functions that share a common name. The different shapes are the different implementations of the function.

For example I could have several different classes that all have a function like this: 

```java
  public void showMeInColor(Color color){...}
```

The stuff in the braces, known as the implementation or the "body" of the function will be different in my two classes. All the rest of the stuff, the name of the function, the arguments, the return type, whether or not it is static, wherther or not it is public or private or protected, etc. will be identical in all the classes. This shared part, the specification about how to call the function is called the signature of the function.

The reason that we want to share the signature is to reduce the amount of thinking that we need to do as a programmer. I could have dozens of different types of objects that all know how to color themselves. I want to keep a list of these and I want to show them all in Green. I really don't care if they all need to do something slightly different in order go show themselves in Green, I just want to go through my list and tell them

```java
  list[i].showMeInColor(Color.GREEN);
```

I don't care that they were different items as long as they all knew how to show themselves in some color.

There are several different ways in which we get this behavior in Java, meaning different keywords and such, but the underlying notion is a single notion, the central notion - we want to allow a single function signature to be implemented in different ways by different classes or types of object.

So I need to give you some vocabulary so that we can talk about the different ways to do this single thing in Java. We will not use all these different ways right now so don't worry about the details at this point - focus instead on the reality, we want to share a single function signature between different implementations.

## Some Vocabulary

 **signature** - this is what you need to know in order to call or use a function. It consists of   the function name   the function return type   the function's arguments and types of arguments   any modifiers on the function like, public, private, protected, static, synchronized, final ... You may think of a function signature as being a "specification" for a function, it represents the interface to a function.

 **implementation** - this is the guts or the body of a function, the stuff in the braces.

 **abstract** - I will call an function 'abstract' if I have ONLY defined the signature.

Note that an abstract function, being a signature only, is essentially a specification. It is a place holder for a function that you expect to implement in several different ways. 

In some sense, you only make a function 'abstract' if you anticipate several different implementations. If there was only going to be a single implementation you would typically go ahead an define the body of the function right there where you defined the function signature.

**parent class** - every single class (except for Object) descends from one single parent class. As a result you always have an ancestor chain, going to your immediate parent, to your parent's parent, all they way back to the end of the chain which is ALWAYS Object.

 **inheritance** - every class 'inherits' from its parent. Suppose the object chain went from Employee to his parent, Person, and from Person to his parent, Object. This means that a Person is a special type of Object. A Person can do anything that an Object can do (meaning the Person object inherited all the functions that were in the class Object).

Now the Person class is allowed to add any Person specific functions that it wants and the Person class is also allowed to override any function that is in Object. Note: "overriding" a function this way is EXACTLY polymorphism. You have taken some function like public String toString() in the parent class, Object, and you use that same identical signature, and you implement it differently in the Person class. Now Person's implementation of toString is different from the implementation sitting in Object.

The class Employee, which descended from Person, means that Employees are a special type of Person. This means that Employees inherit all the functions in the Person class and once again you can add any special functions that are specific to Employees and you are allowed to once again override any function in your ancestor chain. Employees can do toString differently from Persons, they can give their names differently (eg. John Smith, the plumber)

This 'ancestor chain' is not just some theoretical construct. This is the way that the systems actually work under the hood in order to locate the correct implementation (since there could be many) for a function. When you call a function named 'foo' on some object of type Bar, first it looks in the Bar class to see if there is a function named "foo" that is implemented there. If it finds it, great, we are done looking and can use that implementation. If it doesn't find it there, it moves up the ancestor chain and looks in the immediate parent class, the super-class and tries to find the implementation there. The ancestor chain is the path that Java takes when looking for an implementation that matches the function signature when you invoke a function on an object. This is how polymorphism works under the hood, walking up the inheritance chain from parent to parent to Object.

Inheritance is basically a way of sharing code. The whole notion is that an Employee is actually a Person and thus shares all the code of Person. You add extra functions to the Employee class to buff them up to more than just a Person. Each child class is basically an extension of its parent, more specific and doing more stuff. Overriding is generally rare and only needs to be done if there is some reason that Employees need to do some Person function differently than normal Persons.

 **extends** - this is the keyword in a class which defines the parent class. We have not seen it yet because the default behavior when you leave out the extends clause is to make Object your parent class. The use of the !iextends keyword is simple. Here is a class Foo that descends from the class Object - <b>public class Foo{}</b> - and here is one that descends from the class Bar - <b>public class Foo extends Bar{}</b>. The extends clause defines that ancestor chain. We will get to the details of extending a classes later.

 **super class** - this is a synonym for 'parent class'. In the same way that we talk about parent classes we can talk about 'child' classes as well. Employee was a child-class or a sub-class of Person and Person is the super-class or parent-class of Employee.

 **class hierarchy** - the entire ancestory tree defined by the way that all the classes descend from one another is the class hirearchy. (Note: it has nothing to do with Marxism, or British society :)

 **abstract class** - I told you that an abstract function is one that is signature only i.e. a specification without an implementation.

To make a function abstract just include the keyword _abstract_ in the signature and leave off the body.

non-abstract:

```java
  public String foo(Bar bar){... some implementation code here...}
```

same thing abstract:

```java
  public abstract String foo(Bar bar);
```

Well, the moment that you put an abstract function into a class then the entire class became abstract and you will need to declare the class to be abstract as well. This means that you must put the word abstract up into the line that defines the class name so what used to be <b>public class Foo{...}</b>, becomes <b>public abstract class Foo{...}</b>.

The important thing to think about, if you ever think about abstract functions or abstract classes, is that they are incomplete; they are missing an implementation. This means that while the abstract class wants to have a particular function, anyone that looks up the ancestor chain for that function will NOT find it here. By being abstract a class is basically saying, "I want to have this function BUT I don't implement it here. I am incomplete. I require that all of my children implement this function - or they can similarly admit to being abstract and further defer the implementation to one of their children."

Abstraction is a weird notion. Don't worry about it now, we will see it in detail later. I just want you to know the vocabulary. 'abstract' means incomplete, signature only, implementation missing.

To hint at where this is all going, you could have an abstract class Bicycle, with an abstract function boltStuffOntoFrame(Stuff stuff) and then have two child classes, class MetalBike extends Bicycle and class PlasticBike extends Bicycle. The notion being that Bicycles are just Bicycles. Nearly every thing about them, how you drive them, how you stop them, how you shift gears has NOTHING whatsoever to do with whether you made the frame out of plastic or out of metal. You would like to keep all this common Bicyclish behavior in a single class Bicycle BUT one thing that you MUST be able to do with any Bicycle is to be able to bolt something onto the frame but the way that you do that depends very much on whether the frame was made of plastic or metal. So the Bicycle class wants to define boltStuffOntoFrame but it can't. It must defer that function to its children. 

When we actually write the Bicycle class it will be abstract. It will hold all the common functions and defers the one single function to his children, MetalBike and PlasticBike. You will NOT be able to create a new Bicycle() - Java will block you because Bicycle is abstract and therefor is incomplete. You can't use the expression new Bicycle(). However the children are complete and you can construct either a new MetalBike() or a new PlasticBike(). We will later see that you while you can't create a new Bicycle, you CAN have a variable defined as type Bicycle - this code happens all the time: 

```java
  Bicycle bike = new MetalBike(); 
```

You create an object of a specific complete type, a MetalBike, but you throw it into a variable of a reduced type, some ancestor type, like Bicycle. The bicycle is actually a MetalBike, so it has the metal implementation of boltStuffOntoFrame, BUT the variable was more general, it is just a Bicycle. In some sense the bike variable doesn't know and doesn't care what specific kind of bicycle it is holding onto. The key thing is that although Bicycle did not implement boltStuffOntoFrame, it defined the function signature so it knows about it - and thus if you try to invoke the boltStuffOntoFrame function on the object sitting in that Bicycle variable (bike.boldStuffOntoFrame();), the Bicycle class says, "Yeah, that's cool. All Bicycles, know how to do this, All my children know this function, If you ever created one of my descendants and stuffed it into a Bicycle variable than I KNOW that that descendant could NOT have been abstract and could NOT defer the implementation and thus, whichever of my children is sitting in that variable, it MUST have an implementation of boldStuffOntoFrame."

 **interface** - an interface is in some sense the most extreme of an abstract class. An interface is entirely composed of function signatures, nothing but signatures, no member variables, no code, nothing but abstract functions.  Because the entire interface is defined to be abstract you won't see the keyword abstract anywhere in it. It is entirely abstract if it is an interface. Being nothing but specifications

 **implements** - although a class can have only one single parent it is allowed to implement any number of interfaces. Since interfaces are nothing but specifications, they are just contracts. You can implement as many of them as you wish. Thus a typical class header could be public class Foo extends Bar implements Baz, Frazzle, Bean{} - when you see that you know that Foo has a parent class Bar, and that he also implements every single function specified in the three different interfaces, Baz, Frazzle, and Bean.

We will be covering interfaces next so I won't go into more detail here.

The takeaway from this section: All classes have a single parent and thus an ancestor chain. Polymorphism means that you will have multiple implementations of a single function signature - classes will share function names and specifications BUT may well do things differently. The implementation that you get when you call a function will be the one that was found first when Java starts in the object's class and walks up the class hierarchy.

[next: Interfaces](Java0302.md)