## Java 1-6 Getting Starting [&LT;](Java0105.md) [&GT;](Java0107.md)
# Variables and Types

Variables are just named storage locations; places that can hold data. Functions are processes that act on those variables, and classes are containers that hold a collection of variables and functions.

## Java is Type Checked
In computer programming we have many different types of things, integers, strings of text, movies, audio, polygons, images. Some programming languages (like Python) allow you to put any type of thing into any variable, others like Java are 'type checking' languages. In these languages, you must declare what type of thing fits in a variable and if you try to put the wrong type of thing into a variable the language prevents you from doing it.

## Declaration
Declaration of a variable is simple in Java-- you just write down the type of the variable then write down the name of the variable (and then end the line with a semi-colon which ends all the lines in java.)

```java
  int x; // This declares "x" to be of type "integer."
  
  String message; 
  /* message is now a variable that can hold any String (short for "string of text") */
```

You only **declare** the type of a variable once. You are not allowed to change it later. At the same time that you 'declare' the type of a variable you are allowed to **initialize** it to some value. That could look like this.

```java
  int x = 37;
  
  String message = "Yo dude, check it out!";
```
## Assignment
Stuffing a value like that into a variable is called **Assignment**.

```java
  int x; // declaration only
  x = 37; // assignment only
  int x = 37; // simultaneous declaration and assignment aka initial assignment or just initialization.
```

There are also some cases where you would declare other things about the variable as well. For example:

```java
  public static final String TERM_MSG = "The process has been terminated.";
```

For this String we have also declared that it is publicly available to anyone, it is 'static' (which means the variable is a single global var, more about this later) and 'final' meaning that its value is NOT allowed to change. That is why we gave it a name in all caps, because it is a constant.

Because Java is a typechecking language, variable declarations are REQUIRED.

When we start defining functions you will see variable declaration is also used when you define the parameters of the function.

## Math vs Java Function notation
In math you might write f(a) = a + 3; to define a function. In Java, because everything is type checked you must declare what TYPE the function returns, you must also declare the type of the parameter 'a' which you passed in as an argument. This same identical function in java that MATH function would look like:

  int f(int a){ return a + 3; }

The word **int** immediately before the function's name, **f** , declared that the function returns an integer. And the 'int' just before the argument name, 'a' , declared that you are passing in an integer. The BODY of the function, how the function actually works, is the stuff written in the braces. 

For this short function the **implementation**, the stuff in the braces, is a single line. The keyword **return** tells Java what value it should pass back to the outside world when the function is finished and as you can see in our case, we fetch the value out of the parameter 'a' , add 3 to it, and return the result.

## Block Structuring

I have written this function all on one line. This is MY convention and there are many people that won't lay out the function this way. They religiously use indenting for ALL functions. I religiously indent ALL function that are longer than one single line, but if it is only one line I will typically use the more compact form. We will see more indenting much later when we get into loops and conditionals BUT the convention for indenting with braces is probably one of the most strictly followed of them all (in fact it has a name - 'Block Structuring') so it is time to learn it.

In programming we are often building nested structures and the depth of the nesting is shown by the indent. Here is the way that you SHOULD indent the above function

```java
  int f(int a){
    return a + 3;
  } 
```

The CLOSING BRACE character was placed in the same vertical column as the first letter, 'i', in the line  that contained the OPENING BRACE that matched that closing brace. EVERY line in between is indented.

The idea is that you can look UP from a closing brace and immediately find where it opened. The stuff in between the braces is called a BLOCK and hence the name Block Structuring.

One could/should ask why, if this is SO STRONGLY SUPPORTED, why do I adopt a different convention. The reason is simple. Languages, Customs, and Styles change.

I have done a lot of programming in JavaScript as well as Java and the JavaScript convention is closer to what I have described as my conventions. JavaScripters LOVE to write VERY SHORT FUNCTIONS that fit into a single line, and I was writing very short simple functions LONG before JavaScrip was ever developed. 

The PURPOSE of block structure is to make it EASY to see where blocks begins and ends. This is NECESSARY if you are writing BIG blocks. But if your entire block fits on a single line, it is EASY to see where the block begins and ends. If you follow the single line convention of JavaScript, a single line function fits on a single line instead of 3 or 5.

I should point out that Python, if you ever learn it, is a language that elevated the notion of Block Structuring out of the category of CONVENTION up to the category of REQUIREMENT. 

## Typing nested structures

One last comment on nesting. Because we nest things, sometimes quite deeply in programming, it is best to learn to type complete structures. What I mean is this. When I am typing a function like the above I will first type this:

  int f()

I open and close the parentheses immediately.

Then I back up and fill in the interior:

  int f(int a)

Next, I want to add the function body so I open and close the braces immediately:

  int f(int a){}

Then I dip inside the braces and finish:

  int f(int a){return a + 3;}

I would do the same thing even if it was a multi-line function. First I'd type

  int f(int a){}

Then I would go back into the braces, put in the carriage return and be sure that the alignment is correct

  int f(int a){
  
  }

then I would back up a line, indent two more spaces and type

  int f(int a){
    return a + 3;
  }

Of course as you work with any IDE you will see that they do some of this automatic completion for you, like automatically inserting a closeing paren when ever you type an opening paren.

In fact, maintaining Block Structure is the primary reason that we even have Code editors in addition to Text Editors. Nesting is a programming language notation convention that spawned an application category.

[next: Visibility](Java0107.md)