## Java 2-6 Structured Data [&LT;](Java0205.md) [&GT;](Java0207.md)
# Java keyword 'this'

The output from that last version should be exactly what it was. We fixed the constructor to clean up the Hello code, but the output remains the same.

We want to add another person to main and it is much easier to do now. add:

```java
  Person y = new Person("Sally", "Jones", 84);
  System.out.println(y) ;
```

and see that we now have two persons. Oh yes, while we are at it - that "dude named: " portion of the toString is totally unnecessary. Go Rip it out! Just have it print their name in "last comma first" format. Go ahead, I'll wait.

That's great, but Sally Jones is not the topic of this discussion. The topic of this discussion is the Java keyword called 'this'. 

The keyword 'this' is a variable name. It refers to an object. It is a variable name that was declared for you and the type of the variable is the same as the class that you are in. We will discuss its use in constructors first.

## 'this' used in constructor
Here's the deal.

I want you to change the constructor in Person to this and then run it to see that it still works as before:

```java
  public Person(String f, String l, int a){
    this.first = f;
    this.last = l;
    this.age = a;
  }
```

You can almost guess what is going on. 'this' is a variable of type Person. In fact, 'this' IS the very object that we are constructing so 'this.first' is the first name slot. In that first line we are just stuffing the value from parameter 'f' into the field 'first' of the constructed object.

The expression 'this.first' is known as a 'fully-qualified' variable name. It expresses the TRUTH that 'first' is NOT really a variable. It is a FIELD name that can only be used in the context of a single particular object. In order for 'first' to be used as a variable name you MUST know what object you are refering to.

Well, in a constructor we DO know what particular object we are refering to, 'this' is the name of the object that we are constructing. So in constructors you can use this SHORTHAND notation and just treat first,last, and age, as if they are variable names. The compiler sees those names, notices that they are NOT local variables or parameters and so it fully qualifies them with 'this' to give you SHORT names to access the fields.

BUT suppose you wanted to use better names than f,l and a as arguments to the constructor. I mean, the words, first, last, and age are more descriptive. After all that is why we chose them to be the names of the fields in the object.

Well when we use 'this' EXPLICITLY in the constructor we can do that, no problem:

```java
  public Person(String first, String last, int age){
    this.first = first;
    this.last = last;
    this.age = age;
  }
```

It works same as before. You have a parameter named 'first' you passed that into the constructor and the first line set 'this.first' to be the value of that parameter. Prefectly fine.

BUT as soon as you use those better names, you can no longer use that shorthand convention, you will get a name collision. If you try to write 'first = first', the system has NO WAY of knowing that you wanted one of those words to be a field name and the other to be a parameter. What will actually happen in that the local names take precedence over the field names and you MUST fully-qualify the field names if you want to see them.

Some programmers contort their names, trying to choose different names for the parameters from the field names in the class, all just to avoid having to write the word 'this'. **WRONG!** just use 'this' in the constructor when it is appropriate. You WANT the names that show up as parameters to the constructors to match the field names if that is what is going on. Typically that function signature is all of the documentation that the programmer will see so you want good names for your parameters.

## the other use of 'this'

I will now talk about the other use of the word this. It comes from the way that we invoke functions in the object oriented world.

Consider if we call an Object function (not a static one), foo,  in this manner:

```java
  a.foo(b, c)
```

then there are 3 objects involved, 'a' , 'b' and 'c'. We went to the class of 'a' in order to find the function 'foo' - in other words, 'a' took on a special role. The function was invoked on 'a' and as a result <i>a</i>'s class gets to determine the meaning of the function 'foo'. We need a special name for the object that got a function invoked upon him, 'invokee', 'the invoked object', 'this'. That is what the keyword 'this' is - it is just a variable that holds the invokee - it is the object that is responding to the function call. NOTE: static functions are NOT invoked on objects - so static functions have no invokee, no implied object, and no 'this'. You can not use 'this' in a static function. 

Suppose I go look in <i>a</i>'s class. I should find <i>a</i>'s notion of how to implement 'foo'.

```java
  public void foo(Class1 x, Class2 y){  
    blah blah with x   
    blah blah with y 
  }
```

First of all notice that variables change names on the way into a function. This protects the **namespace** on the outside where the call took place, from the namespace on the inside of the function. In other words the objects that were named 'b' and 'c' in the outside world have been renamed 'x' and 'y' while inside the function. The names 'x' and 'y' are **local** to the function. Those names will not clobber or change anything named 'x' and 'y' on the outside. In fact, all the names that you create inside a function 'are local to the function so that they won't screw up anything outside the function. Technically the word 'argument' is the VALUE that you pass into a function and 'parameter' is the NAME of that value while inside the function. So 'b' and 'c' are arguments and 'x' and 'y' are parameters.

However - notice that the function signature only defined two inputs, 'x' and 'y' , as if there were only 2 objects involved with this function - there are actually 3. We started with 'a' , 'b' and 'c'. The last two, the arguments, got passed in as parameters 'x' and 'y' but what happened to the 'a' , the object that we invoked on?

That is what 'this' means. 'this' is ALWAYS a local variable name. It refers to the object that the function was invoked on (or in the case of a constructor the variable containing the object being constructed). So on the outside the three objects were named 'a' , 'b' and 'c'. On the inside they are all renamed to 'this', 'x' and 'y'.

Notice also that while the function signature for 'foo' in <i>a</i>'s class, defined the types of it's two parameters - what is the type of 'this'? Well, if 'a' was of type Bar, then 'this' must be of type Bar as well because after all 'this' is just a rename for the object formerly known as 'a'. When you are in class Bling, then 'this' is a local variable of type Bling.

I have not given you any compelling argument for when and why you would use 'this' in something other than a constructor, and I won't do so at this point. I will point it out when we need it. However in my experience noobs struggle with the notion of 'this', not sure what it means, not sure why we use it. It is ALWAYS used in a place where just a field name alone WILL NOT WORK. Java did not want to REQUIRE you to fully-qualify every single reference to a field name. The shorthand form works so well that you can use it almost all the time (except in constructors). So this shows up FIRST in constructors so that you CAN have parameters names that SHADOW a field name. 

The TRUTH is that it is not the word 'this' that is confusing, what is actually confusing is the SHORT names which can sometimes refer to local variables and sometimes refer to object variables and sometimes refer to static variables. It is the short names that can get into collisions and that is when you need to switch to full names to know what you are refering to.

## Static Context

The explaination about 'this' is the right place to mention an error message that confuses noobs in java "..unavailable in static context". 

Object functions are invoked on an object, and thus have 'this' defined, static functions do NOT have 'this' so you can not use the word 'this' in a static context i.e. inside a static function. However any place that you can NOT use this, you can NOT use shorthand field name like first, last, age - because you can't fully qualify those field names with 'this'. 

It is not really hard, an object function (i.e. a non-static function) is always invoked on an object, always deals with that object and is thus allowed to reference the fields in that invoked object. A static function does NOT deal with an object, was NOT invoked on an object, does NOT have an implied object. Access to a classe's field names is unavailable in a static context.

[next: Object Functions](Java0207.md)