## Java 7-5 Disk Files [&LT;](Java0704.md) [&GT;](Java0706.md)
# File Output

Now that we are able to sort the lines the way that we want, it would be nice to be able to write them out to a new file. Presumably this is not very different from what we did to read them in. For reading we used a BufferedReader, perhaps there is a class BufferedWriter that will do what we need so we open up the java Docs and look.

There is indeed a BufferedWriter and this line is in the documentation:

  PrintWriter out = new PrintWriter(new BufferedWriter(new FileWriter("foo.out")));

The page goes on to talk about the advantages of wrapping up a FileWriter in a BufferedWriter but they make NO comment about why they further wrapped the BufferedWriter up into a PrintWriter. Without looking too closely I would guess that users of a BufferedWriter need to know what they need to write at the end of a line, either a carriage return or a line feed or both (unfortunately the operating systems of the world all do something different). With any luck the PrintWriter will manage the line endings for us. So we go look at those docs

A quick look shows us that the PrintWriter does indeed implement a println() function and a close() function. I haven't really mentioned close() before - typically file system input and output in an operating system makes use of operating system resources. Usually the operating system expects you to do 3 things:

  0.  Open a file - meaning tell the OS what file you expect to work with, and it will look it up, see if it exists, figure out where it actually is on the disk, set aside some space in memory so that it can actually work on the file, and then hand you, the application, a thing called a fileHandle the points to the OS resources that it set aside for working on that one file.
 
  2.  Read or Write - Using the OS fileHandle you can then read or write chunks of data out to the file.
  
  2.  Close the file - you need to do this when you are done to tell the OS that you are finished so the OS can recover the space that it set aside for the file work.
 

When we hide all of that operating system behavior in a language like Java (and we must hide it if we expect to run on several different operating systems) The fileOpen step got hidden in an object constructor - like the new FileWriter() call. The OS fileHandle got hidden inside of the FileWriter object. You never see it. As far as you are concerned your FileWriter object IS the file Handle. You do all your reading and writing to your file object. Then when you are done, you call close() on you reader or writer object so that it can turn around and close the file on whatever OS you happen to be running on.

We used close when we were first reading in the input file, and we will be closing the output file when we are done writing it as well. I just forgot to tell you what close was doing in our read code. I forgot because, well everyone KNOWS you ALWASY close files after IO.

The actual code that we want to put in TextLines should be:

```java
  public void write(String fileName) throws IOException {
    PrintWriter out = new PrintWriter(new BufferedWriter(new FileWriter(fileName)));
    for(String k : lines){out.println(k);}
    out.close();
  } 
```

Let's test if that works by modifying the main routine in Liz_n_Dick

```java
  TextLines t = new TextLines("MaleNames.txt");
  t.sort(new ShortLines());
  t.show();
  t.write("ShortMale.txt");
```

Then look in your file folders and see if you have the ShortMale.txt file there and see if it looks correct.

---
## TextLines 1.2

```java
  package liz_n_dick;
  
  import java.io.BufferedReader;
  import java.io.BufferedWriter;
  import java.io.FileReader;
  import java.io.FileWriter;
  import java.io.IOException;
  import java.io.PrintWriter;
  import java.util.ArrayList;
  import java.util.Collections;
  import java.util.Comparator;
  
  /** TextLines is a utility that will slurp up a text file and convert it to
   * and ArrayList of String, one for each line. This will allow us to do any
   * sort of processing of the lines including sorting them. Presumably, after
   * processing the lines, you would write a new file.
   */
  public class TextLines {
    public ArrayList<String> lines = new ArrayList<>();
  
    public TextLines(String inputFile) throws IOException {
      String line;
      BufferedReader in = new BufferedReader(new FileReader(inputFile));
      while((line = in.readLine()) != null){lines.add(line);}
      in.close();
    }
  
    public void show(){
      for(String k : lines){
        System.out.println(k);
      }
    }
  
    public void write(String fileName) throws IOException {
      PrintWriter out = new PrintWriter(new BufferedWriter(new FileWriter(fileName)));
      for(String k : lines){out.println(k);}
      out.close();
    }
  
    public void sort(){Collections.sort(lines);}
    public void sort(Comparator<String> comparator){Collections.sort(lines, comparator);}
  
  }
```

[next Random Couples](Java0706.md)