## Java 6-1 Mastermind [&LT;](Java0506.md) [&GT;](Java0602.md)
# Inheritance and Extends

Inheritance is a way to extend an old class into a new one that will have some new features in addition to all of the features of the old class.

As an example, we know our old class Person has 4 data members - first, last, age, cougar. Suppose we wanted to have a class for employees, that in addition to those elements also has two more data members: jobTitle and monthlyPay. We are creating a new class because we don't want to have every person in our system lug around those extra fields, and we will also eventually be building some special functions for employees like "issuePayCheck()" or something like that. On the other hand, every Employee is a Person and if we already have routines that work with persons, like toString(), or name(), or even snogs(), well, we would like those routines to work for Employees as well.

It turns out that this is very simple to do. Here is how we start:

```java
  public class Employee extends Person{
    String jobTitle;
    int monthlyPay;
  
    public Employee(String first, String last, int age, String title, int pay){
      super(first, last, age);
      jobTitle = title; monthlyPay = pay;
    }
  }
```

There are two new keywords introduced here: !nextends and !nsuper.

 'extends' is pretty self-explanatory-- the class Employee is an extension of the class Person. We use several phrases in English to describe this; "Employee inherits from Person", "Employee is an extension of Person", "Employee is a sub-class of Person", "Employee is a child class of Person", "Person is the superclass of Employee", "Person is the parent class of Employee". The vocabulary reflects the "Parent/Child - Ancestor/Descendant" sort of relationship. The super-class is the one that you started with, Person, and the sub-class is the new one that you end up with, Employee. 

In Java you are allowed to extend one and only one class. In some other Object Oriented languages, like C++,  you are allowed to inherit from multiple classes (this is called multiple inheritance) however the current view seems to be that allowing multiple inheritance in languages was too complicated and probably a mistake. (sidenote: inheritance was at one time considered the cornerstone of object oriented systems, but the trend now is to not give it such a central role. We will touch on this again if you get to the topic of delegation.) Anyway, in Java you can extend from only one class. 

[Q: um... but if everything is already a sub-class of Object, that's actually 2. And what's to stop you from having a bunch of direct descendents in one lineage? Managers extend Employees extend Persons extend Objects. 

A: No problem, you can have a long descent chains, many ancestors but only one parent. Look at it from the other direction which is the way things really work under the hood. You say you are a Manager and I call a function on you. The Manager class did not actually define that function, Oh really? Let me look in your parent class, Employee, ... still not there, let me look in his parent. Ah, there it is in Person. Ancestor chains are the way that functions get resolved in object oriented systems. That is the way overrides work - meaning if Manager implements a function name() - that function automatically overrides whatever name() did up in the parent class Employee. You start at Manager, and work your way through the ancestor list until you find what you are looking for. In a single inheritance language like Java you have many ancestors but only one immediate ancestor, only one parent, only one immediate super-class. Object is DEFINED to be the end of the ancestor chain. You stop looking when you get to Object]

In Java there is a class, Object, that you will probably never consciously use but it is there under the hood and you in fact use it all the time. When we created the class Person and did NOT put an extends clause on that line, Java by default made the Person class an extension of the Object class. EVERY class in Java (except for Object) has a super-class. Every class has an ancestor and that ancestor is Object if you did not specify some other ancestor. When we learned about the toString() override, what we were doing was this: Person inherited from Object. The Object class implements toString(). As a result anything that inherits from Object (and ultimately everything inherits from Object because everything descends from Object) automatically inherits toString(). Employee inherits from Person - so if you try to toString() an Employee, Java first looks in the Employee class to see if it implemented toString(), if it did not, it looks up the inheritance chain to see if the super class, Person, implemented toString(). If we had NOT overridden toString in Person, it would have kept on looking up the chain of superclasses and eventually found someone, Object, that implemented toString().

Every class inherits the members, both data members and function members from its parent, and every class that you create has a parent. Whenever you apply a function, foo, to any object of any class, the actual function that gets called was found by walking up the inheritance hierarchy looking for the function foo at each level going from class to superclass to superclass. 

So the other keyword that we introduced was super. It is the name of a function and we used it in our Employee constructor. That is the only way that you can use super and furthermore, if I remember correctly, it needs to be the first line of your constructor if you are going to use it. The purpose of super is simple. We are constructing an Employee here. Well, every Employee is first and foremost a person so first we needed to construct that Person and then do whatever extra stuff we need to do do make him an Employee. Calling super was a bit like calling new Person(first, last, age) - we know that the superclass of Employee was Person from the extends clause so we know we need a Person constructor. The only reason that we didn't use the new Person() form directly is that when the user called the Employee constructor, Java, behind the scenes, had already created a new slot to hold our Employee so we don't need to create another new one, we just needed a Person constructor to fill in the slots correctly. The function super told Java, "hey, use a Person constructor to fill in the Person slots first, and then I'll fill in the rest to make it into an Employee".

By the way, it is perfectly OK for a class to have multiple constructors. The only requirment is that those constructors have different signatures. Since all constructors share the same name, the name of the class, the only way to tell the difference between them would be the different signatures. So for example we could have a Person constructor that would fill in the default name, "John Doe" and you only supply the age - Person(int). We could have one that just takes the name and supplies a default age: Person(String, String), but if we did that we could not have two constructors like that, one that worked (first, last) and a second that worked (last,first) because they would both be signature(String, String) and you couldn't tell which one to use. I mention these multiple constructors only because, that is what super must do as well. I called super with (first, last, age) - super did the same thing a constructor would do. It knew that the constuctor was named Person because that was the super class, but if there had been multiple constructors, I would use the signature of the call (String, String, int) to decide which of the multiple constructors you actually wanted to use. 

If you type the above code into NetBeans - you notice that as soon as you have the line public class Employee extends Person typed in, it underlines it in red and tells you that it is not working. If you hover over the bad line and read what was wrong, the basic problem was that you have not typed in the super line yet. You said that Employee extended Person BUT Person did not have a default constructor - recall, once you wrote a constructor for Person, the default constructor goes away. The result is, the ONLY way to construct a Person is to call a Person constructor - and here you are with an Employee class that CLAIMS to extend Person but you haven't told it how to construct that Person, yet. super is the line that finally told Employee how to construct the Person.

However, now that you have created this class, Employee. It is good to go. You can test it immediately in Hello. Go to hello and change the line:

```java
  new Person("Mick","Jagger",103);
```

into:

```java
  new Employee("Mick","Jagger",103,"Singer",2000);
```

And look at all the stuff that is happening automatically: Our Employee class is automatically registering Mick as a Person named Mick, and his name comes out in the list of names. Because Employees are just Persons and because Persons are Named then automatically Employees are Named as well. If you write

```java
  Named x = new Employee("Buzz", "Lightyear", 5, "Captain", 3);
```

it works just fine. Any place you can use a Person you can use an Employee because an Employee is just a Person with some extra stuff glued on.

The important thing to take away is that behind the scenes there is an ancestry tree, an inheritance hierarchy, with Object as the oldest ancestor of all. Every class inherits from somewhere and you may well want to create a class, not from scratch but rather by extending some existing class that does most of what you want. You can get into trouble if you are not careful about the design of this inheritance tree, but on the flip side, there is a lot of power in a well designed inheritance hierarchy.

This extension of the Person class to Employee was rather artificial, in the sense that there isn't really anythying that we want to do with the Employee class. We added on these extra fields and then do nothing with them. We created this class just to introduce the topic of inheritance. In our next exercise we will be creating a game and we will use inheritance in a more productive manner.

## Employee.java

```java
  package hello;
  
  public class Employee extends Person{
    private String jobTitle;
    private int monthlyPay; 
  
    public Employee(String first, String last, int age, String title, int pay){
      super(first, last, age);
      jobTitle = title; monthlyPay = pay;
    }
  }
```

[next: Cows and Bulls](Java0602.md)