## Java 7-7 Disk Files [&LT;](Java0706.md) [&GT;](Java0801.md)
# Summary

In this section you learned about error trapping, exception handling. The control structure is the try-catch-finally block and the keywords that are used are try, catch, finally, throw, and throws. The other important word is of course "Exception" which is a class name rather than a keyword, but is is the ancestor class from which the exception objects that you ultimately catch descend.

We also learned to open and close files for reading and writing. We only really scratched the surface of file handling by using a single pair of classes, BufferedReader and BufferedWriter. These are good for reading simple text files, where you just want to pull in a line of text and make it into a String. We will revisit file handling when we get to a topic knows as Object Serialization. This is the way that you take a whole cluster of objects, typically the entire working state of a program (your application) and write a entire interlinked mess of objects out to a single file - with a single command. You can then de-serialize, meaning read the entire mess all back in from a single file. This is ultimately what many editing applications do, Word, Excel, Paint, MovieEdit etc. The entire spreadsheet, all the rows and columns and formulas are kept in objects, and you dump the entire mess into a single file and call it an xls file. When the user loads it back in, they get the entire spreadsheet back. We will get into this important file operation in the next section.

We saw that the file operations typically throw exceptions. So now we know that file functions can throw exception and we know that in order to deal with those exceptions your choices are ALWAYS ONLY two, you either catch the exception and deal with it, which is the preferred thing if you can do it, or you announce that you won't deal with it in a throws clause.  

Up until now we have mostly been introducing topics in an order to work you through the essential keywords of Java, and along the way we have been introduced to a few of the key classes that are very useful, classes like String, List, ArrayList, Map, HashMap, TreeMap, Random, BufferedReader, BufferedWriter.

We could quickly finish up on the keywords so that you could claim to "know" the Java language, but I think that that is misleading. It is like claiming that you "know" French when you have learned the grammer, even if you don't know any slang, or medical words or how to order a side of fries with your beef bourguignon. Get used to it now. You will only ever partially know a language. Fluency is a goal to strive toward, not a state that you attain. Of course, having made it this far, you can already tell your ignorant friends that you are "fluent" in Java because - hey - you have written several programs and you know nearly all the grammar and you know several important classes. Furthermore, if you have made it this far you probably know more than 95% of the people on this planet even if all your friends are professional programmers. You know Java!

Since we are basically done with the keywords, what we will be doing now is drift from learning keywords toward learning some more classes but more importantly toward learning certain patterns. For example one of those keywords that I haven't yet covered is break. It allows you to cut a loop (either a <b>for</b> or a <b>while</b>) short. You just execute the command break, and you go to the first line after the loop. OK - that was simple, I just taught you another keyword - but I didn't tell you <i>why</i> you would ever want to do that. The loops we have written so far have been doing things like initializing or printing entire Arrays of stuff. Why would you break early? Well the answer is a pattern. Suppose you are searching an array of Strings and you want to find out if it has the word "Steve" in it, and if so you want to do some thing. You run the loop going through the elements one at a time and see if you have the word, "Steve". But once you find it, you are done. No need to keep looking at all the other million elements in the list - you are done, you want to break out of the loop.

While you can use the word <b>break</b> to leave a loop for any reason what so ever, I would guess that 99 times out of a hundred the reason that you used the break was because you were doing a search. There is no "search" command in Java. What you are searching for and how you look for it are too varied - but the pattern is similar - get into a loop that goes through the objects one at a time, if you find the one you are looking for, deal with it and break. The break instruction exists so that you can easily implement a search pattern.

Some of the patterns that we will learn will be small and fairly obvious like that search pattern, others are more rambling - like for example the animation loop that goes into any animated video game. The over arching pattern is conceptually simple, you draw one frame, then another, then another, making little changes in between frames so that it looks like things are moving. There are classes to help you do that, like Timer, so that you have a clock in the background to tell you when it is time to paint the next frame. But the whole business of how you organize your code to make this animation easy is essentially a "pattern" so that you don't need to rethink how you will organizes things when you are faced with essentially the same project.

There is one more control structure that we have to learn, the switch-case-default structure which is often used with char data when you are doing parsing. Parsing is the pattern that most often makes use of that "switch/case" structure. Parsing is a somewhat obscure (though beautiful) technique that is primarily of use in decoding language. As a result if you are writing a Java compiler or any other computer language compiler you will make extensive use of parsing. However if you are not a compiler writer and you don't ever need to decode a language, you might well never need to use the switch-case-default structure. 

The fact is, the switch-case-default is a structure that we developed in the C language before there was object orientation, and it turns out that you can use object orientation to eliminate almost all need for switch-case structure. In some ways switch-case is similar to the unused keyword goto, it was put in because the old language does is, and hey it is still useful for parsing, but other than that, do you really need it? As a result it is hard for me to justify spending time now "finishing" your knowledge of the java keywords, by teaching you something that you may never use when there are other cooler things that we could be doing.

So that is why we will stop using keyword coverage as a measure of you advancement through Java. You are there. Your are fluent. Jump up and do yer little victory dance. Then get back to your keyboard and learn about graphics, mice, windows, serialization,  buttons, event loops, animation, parsing, regular expressions, computational linguistics, artificial intelligence, image processing, user interface design, and we'll have fun, fun, fun, till your daddy takes your laptop away!

[next Swing](Java0801.md)