## Java 6-4 Mastermind [&LT;](Java0603.md) [&GT;](Java0605.md)
#  Helper Classes
==Helper Classes - Scanner and Random
Open up the Java API documentation (you did bookmark it, right?) and look for the class Scanner. This class helps read user input. In particular it does a task known as "tokenizing". It thinks of the input text as being a list of tokens, little chunks of text separated by spaces (or anything else, space is the default, you can change it). Most importantly it can read a number.

Up near the top of the documentation they show you a couple of lines that do this:


```java  Scanner s = new Scanner(System.in);
  int foo = s.nextInt();
```

That looks about right. The System.in sure looks similar to System.out and indeed it is. System.out was an output stream, System.in is an input stream, in particular the keyboard. Presumably we could attach our Scanner to any input stream, like say a file if we wanted to read tokens from a file - but we are not quite there yet. Let's modify those lines slightly, hack them into Games, and test that they do what we thought. Enter these lines after the "Let's play" message:

```java
  Scanner user = new Scanner(System.in); 
  System.out.println(user.nextInt());
```

I renamed the Scanner, user, because that is who we are collecting our input from.

Run the code. You will see the message - "Let's play some games." and then nothing. The nothing is that the system has stopped waiting for you to type something. It can't finish or even start the println() command until it finishes getting the nextInt() from the user. Actually if you just start typing a number, chances are you will muck up your code in NetBeans, because the edit window was the last window that you had open and thus it has the keyboardFocus. All key events are going to that window. You need to first click on the NetBeans output window to give it the focus. Now you should be able to type a number like 17, hit return and see the system echo it back to the screen.

If that all worked I want you to add a third line that is just like the second, i.e. another call to 
  println(user.nextInt());

The system will pause while you type in one number. Hit return, It echoes it back to you then It pauses once again while you type in the next number which it will also echo. Just the sort of behavior that we want.

Now I want you to run it again without changing the code at all but this time, when it pauses the first time type in two numbers on the same line separated by a space like: 13 29

You should see that the system saw them both. Your typing is going into a line buffer that can hold what you type, and can let you backspace and correct mistakes, and it is not until you hit ENTER that the entire line is passed off to Scanner. Scanner then buffers that line, pulling integers and other tokens from its own internal line buffer each time your code asks for one and only when it exhausts that buffer does it go back to the keyboard to read in more stuff. This is maybe a little less than desirable for our application but hey, you didn't have to write the Scanner class which is a good thing. Chances are, if I hadn't pointed this out to you, you never would have noticed. Perhaps neither will your Mom when you try to get her to play the cool game you've just written.

In any case, let us just decide to live with any potential defects of Scanner and move on. We we just testing that it worked in Games but where does our Scanner belong? I maintain that the Scanner user line belongs in Game. So add the line to Game:

```java
  public Scanner user = new Scanner(System.in);
```

We made it public so we could see it in Mastermind. This is actually the one place where I will let you use protected - private means outside of this file no one can see it. public means anyone can see it. protected means this class and any subclasses can see it. When you are extending an abstract class you may mark things as protected if you want them to be "abailable to subclasses but not beyond  that"

There is another class that is used all the time particularly by games which is Random, the random number generator. This is considered to be a math function by Java. You can look up the docs if you wish but here is what I want you to type into Game:

```java
  public static Random rnd = new Random();
```

You will of course want to fix your imports when you type this new class name into NetBeans. (right click on the word Random when it is red-underlined) I want all Games to have access to a random number generator and we only need one ever so we make it static.

Let's test it over in Games. Remove the code that was testing Scanner and add the line:

```java
  System.out.println(Game.rnd.nextInt(6));
```

Run it a few times to see what you get. What did you get? Hopefully you saw a single digit ranging from 0 to 5 (one less than the 6 that you put in as an argument).  Humm... numbers ranging from 0 to one less than N ... where have I seen that before? Oh yes, arrays. How about that? If I had an array of N Strings like this:

```java
  String[] foo = {"dude", "check", "this", "out", "for", "sure"};
```

I could probably print one at random like this:

```java
  System.out.println(foo[Game.rnd.nextInt(foo.length)]);
```

The length of the array is exactly the right number to stuff into the nextInt() method of rnd, to get a random index into the array. Coincidence? I don't think so! Type those two lines into Games, run it a few times and see.

We are going to do one more thing to make our random number generator just a bit more convenient. Since 99 times out of 100 we will be calling the function nextInt() on our random number generator, we could produce a static function rand() (to wrap up our rnd object). Just add

```java
  public static int rand(int limit){return rnd.nextInt(limit);}
```

to the Game file. Now instead of calling Game.rnd.nextInt(17) we can call Game.rand(17), and of course, inside Mastermind which inherits from Game you won't even need to type Game you can just call rand(17).

So there are two classes, Scanner and Random, that will be useful in our Game (and in other applications as well). It took a moment to describe them here but all we have really done in this section is add two variables to the Game class, a Scanner user, and a static Random rnd and then we wrapped rnd with a static function to encode the most common use.

I do however have one last comment about Scanner. If you look at the documentation once again, and look up the actual function nextInt(), you will see that it comes in two varieties, nextInt() with no arguments and nextInt(int radix) that takes a single integer argument. The radix of a number is the number base. If you want to read the number in good old normal base 10, you don't need to supply an argument, you can just use the first method, which is the one that we introduced earlier. BUT if you want to read the number in in BASE 6, you can do that. Pretty sweet, eh?

If you don't know what different number bases are don't worry. We will cover them if and when we need them. But actually numbers in different bases are very useful in everyday life. What, you don't use them daily? You don't believe me? You've just not thought about them properly. Their fundamental utility is as a means to stop silly conversation. Next time you find yourself in some useless chit chat just haul out numbers in different bases. "I'm particularly fond of doing my calculations in radix 7." If you then plug right on and offer to go into elaborate detail, it generally leaves the other person not only desirous of ending your current conversation but also considering avoiding all future contact with you. Trust me on this. It works!

Furthermore, now that I have mentioned this impulse to flee upon hearing someone start to discuss non-standard radix numbers, I trust that the next time I bring it up you will resist this natural impulse and just stay with me to see what's up. On the other hand, perhaps I have already triggered your flight response. If you do stop reading right now just because there is some slight possibility that we might some day do some math, well I guess I'd never know would I.

## Mastermind.java 1.0

```java
  package games;
  
  public class Mastermind extends Game{
  
    @Override
    public void play() {
      score = 1;
      System.out.println("Sweet!");
    }
  }
```
  
## Game.java

```java
  package games;
  
  import java.util.Random;
  import java.util.Scanner;
  
  abstract public class Game {
    public int score = 0;
  
    public static Random rnd = new Random();
    public static Scanner user = new Scanner(System.in);
  
    abstract public void play();
  
    public static int rand(int limit){return rnd.nextInt(limit);}
  }
  ```
    
## Games.java

```java
  package games;
  
  public class Games {
  
    public static void main(String[] args) {
      System.out.println("Let's play some games."); 
  
      System.out.println(Game.rand(6)); // roll the die
      System.out.println(Game.user.nextInt()); // echo user number
  
      String[] foo = {"dude", "check", "this", "out", "for", "sure"};
      System.out.println(foo[Game.rnd.nextInt(foo.length)]);
  
      Game g = new Mastermind();
      g.play();
    }
  }
  ```

[next: Static Nested Classes](Java0605.md)