## Java 8-3 Swing [&LT;](Java0802.md) [&GT;](Java0804.md)
# Graphics Output

The first of the five topics I want to show you about building swing apps is Graphics Output.

The basic free form output device in swing is a JPanel. JLables are components that hold strings, JButtons are of course buttons, there are lots of swing JWidgits that have some special behavior, but the JPanel is basically a blank thing that you can draw on. In the previous HelloSwing we added a JLable with the value "Hello World" to the contentPane. We will be modifying HelloSwing ever so slightly, removing the code to add a JLable and instead adding a JPanel - however we will not just create a generic JPanel, we want a JPanel where we have overridden the code to paint the panel. The default paint for a Panel is just to have a blank screen we want to paint something on our panel - so what we are going to do is build a class, AAAGraphics that extends JPanel. We will override the JPanel's paintComponent() function in this class - then over in HelloSwing we will create a new AAAGraphics object, add it to the component pane so that when the window gets painted, it will call our new paint function and we will get to see it draw graphics on the screen.

We will be building several classes just like AAAGraphics. We will build one that draws a RedTruck, and one with GreenBoxes, and one with StringArt etc. Most of those will be homework - but you will do the same thing. You will create a class - RedTruck that will extend JPanel. You will write override the paintComponent() function. To test your RedTruck code you will modify HelloSwing code so that instead of creating an AAAGraphic object, you will create a RedTruck and add that to the contentPane. Thus HelloSwing is really just a frame into which we will be plugging different JPanels to see how they paint.

I named my first example AAAGraphics so that it would sort to the front of all the other homework examples, because when I am done building AAAGraphics, it will have examples of how to draw Rectangles, Circles, Lines, Colored Text etc. This just makes it easy for you to refer back to this one chunk of code and see how you did the graphics. So Lets get started on the minimal AAAGraphics routine. You should create the AAAGraphics class now in the HelloSwing package. As I said it must extend JPanel and have a paintComponent() function:

```java
  public class AAAGraphics extends JPanel{
    public void paintComponent(Graphics g){
      g.drawLine(0,0,100,100); 
    }
  }
```

Now that we have our AAAGraphics class lets hack up HelloSwing to add it. First remove the two lines that put the JLable on the screen

```java
  // JLabel label = new JLabel("Hello World");     
  //frame.getContentPane().add(label);
```

And then add a new AAAGraphics object to the contentPane

```java
  frame.getContentPane().add(new AAAGraphics());
```

When you run that you should see a diagonal line running from the top left corner of the window. The graphics coordinate system in a window starts in the upper left hand corner. The x coordinate runs to the right as x increases but the y coordinate runs DOWN the page - not up the way it does in math classes. The reason is that computer screens were text screens long before there was graphics. Lines of text start at the top and run down the page so that line 11 come lower on the page than line 10. So the line drawing routine drew from the point (0,0) to the point (100,100). The default coordinate system is in pixels, which are just the individual dots of light on the computer screen. On my big screen that line is about 2 inches long, but you can't count on that, different screens have different physical sizes and different numbers of pixels. Without some work you won't know how big the thing you draw will turn out.

The function to draw a line is called drawLine and the arguments are drawLine(x1, y1, x2, y2). Now you can draw a line from any point to any other point. So where is that drawLine function located? Well, we invoked it on the object g which as we can see is of type Graphics so we know that drawLine is located in the Graphics class. This means that we can go to the documentation, look up the Graphics class and see what other goodies are there, but let's not do that right away. I want to tell you what g really is.

When you are drawing on a windows machine there is a big single (or multiple) screen, and that screen has physical coordinates, with (0, 0) starting in the upper left hand corner) However, applications don't get to draw directly onto the screen. The screen is a shared resource. The only way to make sure that one app doesn't overwrite something that some other app wrote on the screen is to have a manager that controls the screen. That is what windows is - he is the traffic cop that owns the screen and makes sure that apps don't run into one another.

One of the things that changed when we moved from the old style of computing to Windows style computing is the notion of who is in charge. In the old days, the application was the boss. The operating system was just a bunch of helpful library routines. If your app wanted to write to the disk it would call on a library routine to write to the disk. If it wanted to write to a printer, it would write to the printer. The OS worked for the app. Now it is the other way around. Now days the apps are library routines and the OS is the boss. The OS decides who should do what and calls your application functions if it wants something. What this means is that Windows owns the screen, owns the mouse, owns the keyboard. When something happens (like the user drags a window over on top of another one) Windows is the guy that got that mouse event dragging the window, Windows animated the dragging of a window on the screen moving the image from here to there and, windows detected that some previously covered window has been uncovered. Windows knows that the user wants to see what was uncovered so Windows call the app that was just uncovered and says, "Yo dude, you need to repaint yourself"

When you write a paint proc in your swing app, that is what you are doing. You are building a library interface for Windows so that windows can jiggle the screen real estate around to make it look like each application lives in a little window. Windows owns the Mouse. If windows sees that the mouse has clicked in a title bar of a window, Windows will drag that window around on the screen and no application will ever see those mouse clicks and drags - however, if windows detects that you have clicked inside an application, then windows will make that app the current top most window (if it wasn't already), tell the app to repaint itself (if it wasn't on top), and then forward the mouse event, "here - this is your mouse event, deal with it."

Windows is effectively a screen manager and an event pump. Events are things like mouse clicks, mouse drags, keyboard events, and events that windows makes up like "Dude you have just been minimized - free up your memory allocation and move down into the tray" or "The user scrolled you vertically, you are now 100 lines down from where you were." or "Go full screen now" or "You have been closed - exit now!"

So here you are in your paint procedure, and you want to draw on the screen (which you now know is OWNED by Windows) where exactly is the coordinate (0,0)? - where exactly do you draw? The answer is that Windows is the guy that knows WHERE on the physical screen your window is. Windows handed you a graphics object and said, "Dude, if you want to draw on the screen - well here is your graphics context - you draw on this - and I will fix things up and make sure that it got to the right place" You will draw on that Graphics object and Windows will intercept those drawing instructions, translate them from the coordinates that you used (local window coordinates) into physical coordinates on the physical screen, make sure that you didn't write on parts of the screen that aren't yours to write on (limiting where you can write is called 'clipping'). You don't need to know anything about the physical screen. You just draw in your local windows coordinate space and Windows will take care of the rest. 

In fact, when you, an application, are handed a Graphics object g, you don't actually know if you are drawing to the screen, drawing to a shadow bitmap, or drawing to a printer - and this is the way that graphic is virtualized by the system, you only need to learn the graphics commands that the Graphics object can do, and simultaneously you have learned how to draw graphics on several different physical things, namely screens and printers, all at once.

So - your paint procedure in your JPanel is always handed a Graphics object and all your drawing that you do will be done on that object. We have seen how to draw lines. Lets draw two other shapes, a rectangle and an oval. Add these lines BEFORE the drawLine command (that way the line will land on top of the rectangle and the oval)

```java
  g.setColor(Color.RED);
  g.drawRect(50, 50, 100, 30);
  g.fillOval(0, 80, 200, 100);
  g.setColor(Color.BLACK); // set color back to black for the line draw which follows
```

The graphics primitives for Rectangles come in both 'draw' (which only draws the boarder) and 'fill' (which fills in the interior) forms. The color that they use is whatever color was last 'set' into the Graphics object.

I hope your java reading is now skilled enough that you see something like g.setColor(Color.RED) and say to yourself - "Humm... looks like there is a class Color that you use to create Color objects. And it sure looks like you went to the color class to pull out some static object named RED and hey, since it was all caps so it must be a constant. Oh I get it, they keep a few conveniently named colors already built for you right there in the Color class so you can just get them when you need them."

You can probably guess that the arguments for both the rectangle and the oval were the same namely (x, y, width, height) - i.e. the (x,y) coordinate of the upper left corner of the rectangle (or the bounding rectangle for the oval) and a width and height value.

If you don't like their oval definition and you wanted instead a circle function, where you could supply a center coordinate and a radius you would have to write your own function:

```java
  public void drawCircle(Graphics g, int x, int y, int r){ g.drawOval(x-r, y-r, 2*r, 2*r); }
```

Now of course if you write your own function you will see that your function calls look different from the built in Graphics calls. You call will look like foo(g,...) whereas the builtin calls look like g.foo(...). 

```java
  drawCirlde(g, ...) vs.  g.drawRect(...)
```

You can see from the way that they were called, that drawRect is a function built into the Graphics class but drawCircle was a helper function that you wrote so you needed to pass a Graphics object into it.

The other main output function that you will want is to be able to draw text on the screen. The text itself is a single call, but I have written several lines to do something more. I have looked at the FontMetrics object to get some important numbers that lets me draw a bounding box around the text. I will discuss in a moment why we might want to do that. After the line draw add this code

```java
  int x = 250; int y = 100;     
  g.drawString("Hello ugly", x, y);     
  FontMetrics fm = g.getFontMetrics();     
  int w = fm.stringWidth("Hello ugly");     
  int a = fm.getAscent();     
  int d = fm.getDescent();     
  g.setColor(Color.RED); // draw the baseline in Red     
  g.drawLine(x, y, x + w, y);     
  g.setColor(Color.GREEN); // draw bounding box in green     
  g.drawRect(250, 100 - a, w, a+d);     
  g.setColor(Color.BLUE); // draw circle around starting coordinate for text     
  g.drawOval(x - 2, y - 2, 4, 4);
```

Yes, its a lot of code but it should be pretty clear what is going on. The xy that you supply to the draw string is located at the start of the string and at the baseline of the string. The word "ugly" had two letters with descenders which should drop below the red baseline that we draw. You can see that in order to draw the bounding box we needed to back off the y by the ascent, a, and the total height of the bounding box is the sum of the ascender hight and the descender height. If you wanted to draw another string underneath this one at the proper spacing between lines you would need to get yet another number from the FontMetrics, namely the 'leading' - this is named from the good old days of physically setting type in slugs of lead, and you would slip in a thin sheet of lead to space one line from the next.

Boy, that sure is an ugly font that they have as a default. I wonder how hard it is to change the font that the graphic object is using? I bet if I looked up the documentation for Graphics, I would find a g.setFont(font); function that requires that you supply it with a Font. That would then mean I need to go look up the documentation for Font and see if I could construct a new one with something like new Font("Times New Roman", Font.Plain, 24) - of course, I have no idea if that is a legitimate font name on your system - it seems to work on mine.

The reason that you might want to know the bounding box for a chunk of text is that it is very easy to test if an x,y coordinate is inside a rectangle or not. Later, when we get to mouse events, we will see that the way to tell if a user clicked on some chunk of text that you wrote to the screen, you need to know where you wrote it, and what is its bounding box so you can test if the mouse coordinates lie inside the text's bounding box.

You probably won't ever be actually drawing the bounding boxes around text, but this type of code - actually drawing the boxes - is the way that you can tell if you are actually doing the mathematics correctly in figuring out where the box is. And that it why I have included this long bunch of code inside of AAAGraphics. It is there to remind you of things like the FontMetric class and the getAscent function and the stringWidth() function. So AAAGraphics now gives you examples of how to do the four standard Output things in one single place.

After I collect the AAAGraphics code into one place I will give several sample Output-Graphics-Only homework problems. RedTruck, GreenBoxes, etc. When you look at the solutions to those problems you should see the code for the paintComponent() function for each one which you would paste into a class of the appropriate name and call from HelloSwing.

I want to give lots of homework examples - so you can see the variety of pure Output that we can do. I do not expect you to do all or even any of these as homework. You may work them out on your own, or just look at the answers to see if you can understand how they work, or you can just look at the problems and skip looking at the solutions until you've had a chance to think about them, OR you can skip them all for now (with the good intentions that you will someday return and look at them) and move on to section 2. Mouse Events. 

## AAAGraphics.java 1.0

```java
  package HelloSwing;
  
  import java.awt.Color;
  import java.awt.FontMetrics;
  import java.awt.Graphics;
  import javax.swing.JPanel;
  
  public class AAAGraphics extends JPanel {
  
    public void paintComponent(Graphics g){
      g.setColor(Color.RED);
      g.drawRect(50, 50, 100, 30);
      g.fillOval(0, 80, 200, 100);
      g.setColor(Color.BLACK);
      g.drawLine(0, 0, 100, 100);
  
      int x = 250; int y = 100;
      g.drawString("Hello ugly", x, y);
      FontMetrics fm = g.getFontMetrics();
      int w = fm.stringWidth("Hello ugly");
      int a = fm.getAscent();
      int d = fm.getDescent();
      g.setColor(Color.RED); // draw the baseline in Red
      g.drawLine(x, y, x + w, y);
      g.setColor(Color.GREEN); // draw bounding box in green
      g.drawRect(250, 100 - a, w, a+d);
      g.setColor(Color.BLUE); // draw circle around starting coordinate for text
      g.drawOval(x - 2, y - 2, 4, 4);
    }
  }
  ```
  
[next: Red Truck](Java0804.md)