## Java 7-3 Disk Files [&LT;](Java0702.md) [&GT;](Java0704.md)
# Reading Lines from a File

We want to read some lines from a text file in java and since we don't remember how to do that we cruise out to google and look for

```text
  java read lines from text file
```

We find several chunks of code that are essentially this:

```java
  import java.io.*;  
  class FileRead{  
    public static void main(String args[]) {   
      try{   
        FileInputStream fstream = new FileInputStream("textfile.txt");
        DataInputStream in = new DataInputStream(fstream);   
        BufferedReader br = new BufferedReader(new InputStreamReader(in));   
        String strLine;  
        while ((strLine = br.readLine()) != null) {   
          System.out.println (strLine);   
        }   
        in.close();     
      } catch (Exception e){
        System.err.println("Error: " + e.getMessage());   
      }   
    }  
  }
```

We look at this disgusting pile of garbage, skipping over the imports and try/catch stuff and wonder if the code to read a line from a file really requires that we

  0.  construct a FileInputStream from the name of a file
  2.  construct a DataInputStream from the FileInputStream
  2.  construct a InputStreamReader from the DataInputStream
  2.  construct a BufferedReader from the InputStreamReader

Thus creating 4 different objects stuffing them into 3 different variables, **fstream** , **in** , and **br**  and then reading lines from **br**  but closing **i**n at the end.

Gag me! Is Java file reading really this disgusting? or is it just that the web is a **garbage heap** where any idiot can blog his brains out?

Let's do a quick sanity check. We bookmarked the Java API docs. Let's go check on the docs for BufferedReader which was the top of this chain and see if they don't have a path that allows us to use a few fewer steps.

Sho'nuff Right there near the top of the document is the single line:

  BufferedReader in = new BufferedReader(new FileReader("foo.in"));

contracting the several ugly lines down into one and collapsing the variables from three to one. A quick check of the supported methods for BufferedReader shows us

  0.  we can close the file with in.close()
  2.  there is indeed a readLine() method
  2.  and readLine() returns a null when we are finished reading the file. So we know when to stop reading

So reading a file becomes a couple lines.

```java
  String line;  // declared for use inside the while loop
  BufferedReader in = new BufferedReader(new FileReader(inputFile)); 
  while((line = in.readLine()) != null){lines.add(line);} // add each line to the list
  in.close()
```

I have done something here that you have not seen before in the boolean expression of the while statement. It is a C idiom that was copied into the Java language.  

```java
  (line = in.readLine()) != null
```

Basically we do the assignment statement, reading a line and shoving it into the variable 'line' - however, in addition to treating that assignment like a complete stand alone code statement we also treat the assignment like an expression whose value is the same as the value we just shoved into the variable. We check that value to see if it is not equal to null. That is how it works, it does an assignment and then the boolean calculation. The way I tend to think of it though, is that we are doing a boolean calculation: essentially: 

```java
  in.readLine() != null
```

which is what we needed in the while statement - we are checking to see if readLine returned a null - Oh and by the way, that boolean calculation had a side-effect, it stored the value of readLine into the variable line.

After we have loaded the file we will probably want to see what we just read in so after we close the file let's call to a routine, show(), which we will need to write.

```java
  show();
```

the show routine would be a pretty simple one liner

```java
  public void show(){ for(String k : lines){System.out.println(k);} }
```

And finally, just to be generous, we should pause for just a moment to thank the idiot who posted that 4 object mess of code, because it did show us the name of the all important class BufferedReader. We could also reflect just for a moment on the possibility that Java may have actually been that disgusting at the time that that blogger posted and thus the blogger may have actually been a saint rather than just a idiot. ie. we admit faintly the possibility that not everyone that posts to the internet is a complete idiot. Guess we'll never know. Wait a second, I'm posting this to the internet. Finally, proof that not all posters are absolute idiots - send out the tweets!!

So now that we know the guts of what we need let's create a new project named Liz_n_Dick for our classes. Then create a class TextLines. TextLines should have an ArrayList to hold the lines

```java
  public ArrayList<String> lines = new ArrayList<>();
```

and it needs a constructor that will take in a file name, and slurp up the three lines

```java
  public TextLines(String inputFile) throws IOException {...}
```

NetBeans will want you to fix the imports for the IOException. While NetBeans if fixing things, you may have noticed that the BufferedReader can throw a FileNotFoundException. If you looked carefully in the documentation for BufferedReader (I'll wait while you go look) you will see that the documentation for readLine() said that it could throw IOException - a broad bucket that holds just about any kind of exception that could happen while doing IO. It turns out that the FileNotFoundException is just a sub-class of IOException so, while there are different kinds of exceptions that our constructor can throw, they all descend from IOException so we really only need to say that it throws one of those.

Finally we can test it all with a line in our Liz_n_Dick main method with the line:

```java
  TextLines t = new TextLines("MaleNames.txt");
```

Notice that as soon as you added in the constructor for TextLines into the main routine, NetBeans noticed that the constructor can throw exceptions. You must catch 'em or declare 'em. We don't intend to do anything so we will just throw them. What? Throw them from the main routine? There isn't anything higher up the call chain then main. What happens to an exception that isn't caught anywhere in your program? Well the java system itself with catch them, and having no idea of what anything means it will just terminate your program and report the errors.  

So we must fix the signature of main to admit that

```java
  public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException {
```

and we are ready to test. If you have managed to do everything as I have outlined it above - when you run the code it should fail.

Of course it will fail. I mean I AM showing you error handling so I did want you to see the error reporting working as promised, eh. What is our failure? It should be "File not Found: MaleNames.txt ..."

We never told the TextLines constructor where to look for the MaleNames.txt file. In fact, I never told you where to put it on your disk. When you downloaded it, (or copied it and pasted it from the Moodle site) where did you save it? On your desktop? In a downloads directory? In fact, now that we are thinking about it, where is Java going to start looking for files that don't have a full path name included? Maybe in the folder which matches the package name of the class (since that is after all where we found the class that we are running)? Let's give that a try. Move the file MaleNames.txt into the folder Liz_n_Dick. Try it again. You should see the Male names come spewing out into the NetBeans text window.

Note: I was not clear when I mentioned moving the file to the Liz_n_Dick folder, NetBeans actually created several folders with that same name, One of them is in the NetBeansProject directory and there is another one located under "src" for source files where your java files are kept. I put the text files in the high level one located in the NetBeansProject directory. Further note, NetBeans will allow you to drag and drop a file into your "source" file subdirectory, which is the wrong place, but it will NOT allow you to drag and drop a file into the project directory. Who knew? You need to open your windows file explorer, and move the files to the right place, OR you could of course embed the full path name in front of the file name in your code. And of course, if you ever tried to package and deliver this code to someone else, who knows where files are located on their machine. We have, in this tutorial ducked entirely the issue of how you deploy and install code on someone else's machine.

Next, we figure out how to sort those lines the way we want them sorted.

---
## Liz_n_Dick.java 1.0

```java
  package liz_n_dick;
  
  import java.io.IOException;
  
  public class Liz_n_Dick {
  
    public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException {
      TextLines t = new TextLines("MaleNames.txt");
    }
  }
  
==Textlines.java
  package liz_n_dick;
  
  import java.io.BufferedReader;
  import java.io.FileReader;
  import java.io.IOException;
  import java.util.ArrayList;
  
  /** TextLines is a utility that will slurp up a text file and convert it to
   * an ArrayList of String, one for each line. This will allow us to do any
   * sort of processing of the lines including sorting them. Presumably, after
   * processing the lines, you would write a new file.
   */
  public class TextLines {
    public ArrayList<String> lines = new ArrayList<>();
  
    public TextLines(String inputFile) throws IOException {
      String line;
      BufferedReader in = new BufferedReader(new FileReader(inputFile));
      while((line = in.readLine()) != null){lines.add(line);}
      in.close();
      show();
    }
  
    public void show(){for(String k : lines){System.out.println(k);}}
  }
```

[next: Sorting](Java0704.md)