## Java 7-2 Disk Files [&LT;](Java0701.md) [&GT;](Java0703.md)
# Liz and Dick

Liz&Dick, Boris&Natasha, Fred&Ethyl, Lois&Clark - all Famous couples. All easy to remember and type. With a mixture of upper case, lower case, and one symbol character.

It occurred to me that I could use something like that in another project that I am working on, where I need something that looks like a temporary password but is easier to remember and type than something like Rx4ph89Qy.

[addendum: Oh Sorry, not everyone is as old as I am. Liz and Dick were the Brad and Angelina of their day, Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton. Fred and Ethyl were the neighbors on the "I Love Lucy" TV program from the 1950s, Lois and Clark are ... No, I refuse to explain Lois and Clark. If you can't get that reference you must be reading this in the year 2525 wondering what this "java" thing is and why computers and computer languages were so pathetic.]

Note: couples' names like these do NOT make good passwords. The pattern is too easy, the total number will be only hundreds of thousands not Billions and Billions that you want for real passwords. But a couple name would be good for my project and it occurred to me that this is easy enough to use as an example of simple code. So unlike the other examples you have seen so far this is your first real world problem.

I would like the names to be fairly common so that they are both easy to remember and easy to spell, and I would prefer it if they are short like Liz&Dick or Jane&Sam rather than Elizabeth&Christopher. So basically I need a list of short simple first names. Fortunately the Census provides us with some name lists. The link at the time I write in 2013 is:

http://www.census.gov/genealogy/www/data/1990surnames/names_files.html  --Dead Link as of 2015/3/17

Well, since the time I wrote this chapter back in 2013 the census link has died. I could google around and try to find these files, I mean seriously they are government files they MUST still exist somewhere, OR since I did keep copies of the downloaded files perhaps I could put them somewhere. I am right now in 2015 in the process of moving my java course out of an online moodle system and thinking about how I want to deploy this as a stand alone file. If you got this course in a folder on a thumb drive, then perhaps that folder will also hold the government name files, if instead you are reading this course on-line somewhere somehow, you will have to either find the files or pretend that you found the files in order to work through this code example.

https://www.census.gov/topics/population/genealogy/data/1990_census/1990_census_namefiles.html &LT;&LT:-- this was there Aug 2021

There are 3 files listed. Male first names, Female first names, and the big file, Family Names. 

I will clip the top 10 lines of the male and female file for you here.

    0.  JAMES          3.318  3.318      1 
    2.  JOHN           3.271  6.589      2 
    2.  ROBERT         3.143  9.732      3 
    2.  MICHAEL        2.629 12.361      4 
    2.  WILLIAM        2.451 14.812      5 
    2.  DAVID          2.363 17.176      6 
    2.  RICHARD        1.703 18.878      7 
    2.  CHARLES        1.523 20.401      8 
    2.  JOSEPH         1.404 21.805      9 
    2.  THOMAS         1.380 23.185     10


The first number on each line is the percentage of people with that name, so 3.318 guys are named James.

The second number is the running percent of the total, so you can see that by the time we have included the 10th ranked name, we have 23.18% of the male population has one of those top 10 names.

The third column is the rank.

These were taken from the 1990 US census data.

    0.  MARY           2.629  2.629      1
    2.  PATRICIA       1.073  3.702      2 
    2.  LINDA          1.035  4.736      3 
    2.  BARBARA        0.980  5.716      4 
    2.  ELIZABETH      0.937  6.653      5 
    2.  JENNIFER       0.932  7.586      6 
    2.  MARIA          0.828  8.414      7 
    2.  SUSAN          0.794  9.209      8 
    2.  MARGARET       0.768  9.976      9 
    2.  DOROTHY        0.727 10.703     10

You can see from the cumulative totals, that there is more variability in Girls names than Boys names - only 10% of the girls are given the top 10 names.

As you can see, the names as we get them from the Census data are in rank order, most common first. This can put long names like Elizabeth or William toward the front. These names are common, probably easy to spell because they are common. Names from near the end of the male list include Sid, Jere, Hai. Sid is great, Jere and Hai look to me like respelling of Gerry and Hy but that may just be me. (I personally know people with the second spellings but not the first - you will no doubt have a different experience with names toward the end of the list)

What we want to do is read in one of these files, and sort it - not by rank and not by spelling but rather by length, so short names come first and within a group of names, like within the group of 4 letter names, we would like to be sorted by rank so that the more popular 4 letter names come in front of the less popular ones. This will make it easier when we decide to hand trim off the harder to spell names.

Eventually we will work our way down to a list of short approved male names and short approved female names and then can create pairs at random from these lists.

So that is our strategy, we want to load a file into memory, sort it by our special criteria, then write it back out to another file so that we can hand trim it. We will have a final chunk of code that will load in the two trimmed files and spew random couple names (just so we can look and see if they are in fact memorable and easy to type.)

Your homework once we are done with the girls and boys would be to extend this in the same way to include a family name - that would be Liz&Dick Hall, Tina&Sid Lopez.

[next: reading from a file](Java0703.md)
