## Java 4-2 Conditionals and Booleans [&LT;](Java0401.md) [&GT;](Java0403.md)
#  Conditional Expression
==Condidtional Expression - (boolean) ? Exp1 : Exp2
There is a shortcut to using the format of a full if statement when all you want is the result of one single expression if something is true, and the result of a different expression if the something is false. It is easier to show the code than to talk about it. I will first write some code using the full if statement that we just learned and then clean it up into something more succinct using conditional expressions.

Now that our Persons can be cougars we'd like to modify our toString() function (right under the first @Override in the Hello class) so that it tells us the additional information of whether or not they are a cougar. So I'd like the name of Mick to be

```java
  Smith, Mick
```
and the name of Sally (after snogging Mick) to be

  Jones, Sally, a known cougar

We could modify toString() to look like this:

```java
  String result = last + ", " + first;
  if(cougar){
    result = result + ", a known cougar,";
  }
  return result;
```

What have we done here? We introduced a new local variable named <b>result</b> that is of type String to hold the String that we are building up. We first load up result with the person's name, then we test if they are a cougar, and if so, the guarded code adds the "known cougar" onto the result string. Finally we return the result.

Go ahead, hack this into the Person class and test it. (you will need to modify the Hello code as well, because the way Hello is currently written, we don't print out Sally's name after she was detected to be a cougar so you will need to fix Hello to make it test correctly. She can either snog Mick again, Mick can snog her, or you can just print her name again.)

The conditional expression is just an expression (like x + 3) in that it returns/has a single value without looking like a function call. (calling a function is the act of invoking or using the function, as distinguished from the act of defining the function.) The conditional expression is actually composed of 3 expressions: first - a boolean, second - an expression to evaluate if the boolean is true, and third - the expression to evaluate if the boolean is false. Just like the if-else statement, you get one or the other but not both. It looks like this

```java
  boolean_expresion ? expression2 : expression3
```

A concrete example of that would be the expression 

```java
  (a<3) ? "dude" : "sweet"
```

this expression is just a single string, either "dude" or "sweet" depending on whether or not some variable a is less than 3.

So for example, the back part of the name string is either ", a known cougar" or else it is the null string "". So the back part of the name string is the single conditional expression

```java
  cougar ? ", a known cougar," : ""
```

You see, it tests the variable cougar, and returns one or the other strings. Since this expression is just a String, we can just glue this String onto another String with plus just like we have done before. So as a result our toString() function could have been written like this:

```java
  return last + ", " + first + (cougar ? ", a known cougar," : "");
```

One line instead of five. (I put the parentheses in because without the parens to evaluate the conditional expression first - Java tried to add the boolean cougar to the string "first" and it didn't know how to do that. In other words, First I did it the wrong way without the parentheses. NetBeans caught the mistake and I realized that the fix was to make sure that the expression was grouped properly - parentheses never hurt in a complicated expression.)

If you don't want to learn to use conditional expressions that is fine. They are in no way essential. Anything that you can do with them you could do with if statements, but if you are reading other people's code, they will use these sometimes as they are convenient and even quite readable if you don't try to use them for something that is too complex. This use for gluing together little strings is a typical example of places that you would use them.

## Person.java 2.2

```java
  package hello;
  
  public class Person implements Named{
    private String first;
    private String last;
    private int age;
    private boolean cougar = false;
  
    public Person(String first, String last, int age){
      this.first = first;  // user passes in f, we load it into the slot first
      this.last = last;
      this.age = age;
    }
  
    public void snogs(Person p){
      System.out.println("Holy smoke, " + this + " just snogged " + p);
      if(this.age > (p.age + 20)){
        this.cougar = true;
        System.out.println("Cougar detected!");
      }
    }
  
    @Override
    public String toString(){
      return last + ", " + first + (cougar ? ", a known cougar,":"");
    }
  
    @Override
    public String name() {
      return first + " " + last;
    }
  }
  ```
  
 [next: No Magic Numbers](Java0403.md)