## Java 5-3 Arrays and Loops [&LT;](Java0502.md) [&GT;](Java0504.md)
# Maps

One of the other useful collection objects is the Map. There are two that are interesting, the TreeMap and the HashMap. I will show you how to use a Map and then comment briefly on the difference between Trees and Hashes. The commentary is optional - I want to introduce you to the notion that there are these things called algorithms, (and trees and hashes happen to be two different data-structures that can be used to implement a Map) and that different algorithms can have different performance profiles. It will not matter in the least for anything that we do which of these maps you use as we will not do anything that requires any particular performance. However I will show you how to design them so that you could switch if it ever did make a difference.

In some sense, Maps can be thought of as an extension of an array. An array is a form of a "look-up table." I enter a number, like 3, and the computer tells me the item in the collection that is associated with the number 3, (that would be the fourth element, right? counting from 0, we go 0,1,2,3 - trust me, you'll get used to this.)

A Map is a collection of "key-value pairs". The idea is just like an array. I enter a key, like 3, and the computer tells me the value that is associated with 3. The only difference between the Map and the array is that in an array the "keys" are always integers and always start at zero. If you want more complicated keys - like say text Strings - you need a Map.

If you think about it, the index at the back of a book is a map. It even helps you understand why this class is called a Map. You pick a word that you are trying to find in the book, you flip to the index, you look up the word and you get - a list of page numbers. That list of page numbers is the VALUE associated with the KEY - the word that you looked up. Just like a physical map, a Java Map helps you find where things are.

Just like an array, with a Map, you can both "get" values and "set" values. In an array like b, you get a value by using an expression like b[17], and set the value with an assignment like b[17] = "foo";

In a Map you get values with get(), map.get("foo"), and set them with a function called put() When you type map.put("foo", "bar") - "foo" is the key and "bar" is what gets stored in the "foo" slot.

Once again here is a possibly dead link to the Java API docs. If they haven't moved it look up the HashMap class. If it has moved, do a Google search and find the new site. Go ahead and mark it as a favorite. You will be referring to this all the time and I will quit mentioning it in this write-up. When I say "look up a class" I mean go to this Java API list, scroll to the class, click on it and review the info.

<a href="http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/">http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/</a>

So look up HashMap, scroll down to the Method Summary section and see that the class defines a method named "put".

  put(K key, V value) 
  // Associates the specified value with the specified key in this map.

This is what the docs are there for: to let you look up the functions that a class defines and say, "Oh look, if I had a HashMap class I could put things into it right at a particular key. How sweet is that!"

So here is what we are going to do with our Person class. We are going to create a static Map in the class called byName. Basically we want a place where we can go and effectively say, "if we got a guy named Steve, hand him to me."

In the Person class up in the variable section add the line

```java
  public static Map<String,Person> byName = new HashMap<>();
```

You will need to fix the imports for HashMap and Map (just click fix imports once and both will get imported).

We are doing several new things here: Notice that over in the declaration side I told you that this was a Map, but over on the initialization side I told you that it was a HashMap. This should remind you of when I shoved a Person into a variable that was of type Named. A HashMap is a type of Map and is compatible with the Map interface, A TreeMap is also a type of Map that is compatible with the Map interface. I declared that byName was a Map so either type of Map can go into the byName slot.

Just for grins, change the HashMap to Map and note what NetBeans tells you. It doesn't like it. Why? It tells you Map is abstract. Do you remember what abstract means? It means you defined some function signatures BUT you did not implement them. Java won't let you construct something that is missing some component. Map is an abstract class. An abstract class is like a blend between an interface (which is purely abstract - nothing but signatures) and a real class which is all implementation and code. An abstract class can be a mixture of both - some things implemented and some things abstract.

Recall a function signature is just the stuff that shows up on the first line when you define a function. It is the name of the function, the return type, and the arguments. This is the interface that the outside world sees. It is all the information that you need in order to be able to call the function. The signature tells you NOTHING about how the function actually worked. That is the stuff inside the braces. That is what the implementation of the function is. Every function has two parts, the signature that informs the world how to call a function - that is the interface to the function, and the stuff in the braces which is the implementation that tells you how to perform the function. If a function is missing its implementation then that function must be declared abstract because it is incomplete. Similarly any class that has an abstract function in it is likewise incomplete and must be declared abstract.

Maps happen to be abstract. Map describes the entire interface that you need to be able to use a Map, BUT the actual Map class, being abstract left out some important details. TreeMap and HashMap are two classes that both extend Map and they both do so in order to fill in those missing details.

Basically, there is a lot of code that is common between TreeMaps and HashMaps and the coders didn't want to write that common code twice, so they built an abstract class called Map, and put the common code there. They also included the abstract signatures for the functions that must be done differently between the two classes HashMap and TreeMap. Now anyone that needs a Map can create a variable, shove a particular type of Map into it (either a HashMap or a TreeMap) and then be vague about what's in there. 

Do you see it? The Person class can hand that Map off to anyone and say, "Hey, it's a Map. You can put stuff into it and take stuff out of it - but it is none of your business to know what kind of map I chose to use." This way Person can decide which type of map is appropriate and the outside world is sheltered from that choice. This is a KEY element of polymorphism.

Think about it. If I declared a variable in the Hello program as a HashMap so that I could put the Person.byName map there - I would no longer be able to change my mind over in the Person class and change it to a TreeMap. If I did change to a TreeMap in Person, Hello would be broken. So this is a very common pattern in Object Oriented Programming. Create a variable named by an abstract class and shove a more detailed implementation of that abstract class into that variable. Announce to the outside world that your interface is that abstract class. Then they can use it, and you can change your implementation without breaking existing clients.

Declare your variables as the LEAST SPECIFIC type that will work. So the only Maps that you will ever create newly are going to be very specific, either HashMaps or TreeMaps but the only variables you will declare will be very general, just Maps.

There is one other thing that you should know about the line that declared the map. I declared a Map&lt;String,Person&gt; and I created a HashMap&lt;&gt;. I didn't tell you that it was a HashMap&lt;String,Person&gt;. Well, even though I didn't tell you, that's what it was. Java is smart enough to know that the ONLY type of HashMap compatible with a Map&lt;String,Person&gt; is a HashMap&lt;String,Person&gt; so it filled in the details for you. Just for the record "&lt;&gt;"this is called the "diamond operator" because it looks a bit like a diamond. It is slightly stylistically prefered. So you declare the type with all the details but the constructor can and should use the diamond.

So now that we have a Map in the class, no surprise, we need a line in the constructor so that we add people to the map as they are constructed:

```java
  byName.put(this.first, this);
```

In the constructor this is the name of the constructed object so we use this's first name as the key and associate it with this itself.

We test this with just a bit of code in Hello:

```java
  System.out.println(Person.byName.get("Mick"));
  System.out.println(Person.byName.get("Steve"));
```

That last line should be interesting - there isn't anyone named Steve. What will happen? Check it out.

## Person.java 3.2 

```java
  package hello;
  
  import java.util.ArrayList;
  import java.util.HashMap;
  import java.util.Map;
  
  public class Person implements Named{
    private String first;
    private String last;
    private int age;
    private boolean cougar = false;
    private static int COUGAR_CUT_OFF = 20; // snog someone 20 years younger and become a cougar
    public static ArrayList<Person> all = new ArrayList<>();
    public static Map<String,Person> byName = new HashMap<>();
  
    public Person(String first, String last, int age){
      this.first = first;  // user passes in f, we load it into the slot first
      this.last = last;
      this.age = age;
      all.add(this);
      byName.put(this.first, this);
    }
  
    public void snogs(Person p){
      System.out.println("Holy smoke, " + this + " just snogged " + p);
      if(!this.cougar && this.age > (p.age + COUGAR_CUT_OFF)){
        this.cougar = true;
        System.out.println("Cougar detected!");
      }
    }
  
    @Override
    public String toString(){
      return last + ", " + first + (cougar ? ", a known cougar,":"");
    }
  
    @Override
    public String name() {
      return first + " " + last;
    }
  }
```
   
## Hello.java   

```java
  package hello;
  
  import java.util.ArrayList;
  
  public class Hello {
  
    public static void main(String[] args) {
      System.out.println("\nTesting Person");
      Person x = new Person("Mick", "Smith", 19);
      Person y = new Person("Sally", "Jones", 84);
      System.out.println(x);
      System.out.println(y);
      y.snogs(x);
      y.snogs(x);
  
      Animal a = new Animal("Smokey", "bear", "Only you can prevent forest fires");
      System.out.println(a);
  
      Named n  = x;
      System.out.println(n.name());
      n  = a;
      System.out.println(n.name());
  
      ArrayList<Person> b = Person.all;
      for(int i = 0; i<b.size(); i++){
        System.out.println(b.get(i).name());
      }
      System.out.println("--All persons--");
      for(Person p : Person.all){System.out.println(p.name());}
  
      System.out.println(Person.byName.get("Mick"));
      System.out.println(Person.byName.get("Steve"));
  
    }
  }
```

 [next: Nested Generics](Java0504.md)