## Java 4-3 Conditionals and Booleans [&LT;](Java0402.md) [&GT;](Java0404.md)
# No MAGIC

Don't use MAGIC numbers!

Well we have some code working BUT we violated one of the basic style rules. We used a **MAGIC** number. In a formal work environment you may go through 'code review' - where someone will look though the code you wrote, line by line, with you sitting there, making comments on things that you could have done better. And incidentally, that is one of the difficulties of teaching programming on-line, I don't get to review your code. I only get to anticipate the types of mistakes that newbies make from having seen a whole bunch of newbie mistakes. I try to write my code only slightly wrong and then immediately try to improve it. This is to give you the flavor of what a code review would be.

The MAGIC number that we used was 20, the arbitrary threshold that we used to determine cougarhood. The problem with magic numbers is simple; they are hard to find and are not well documented. Imagine the problem when the Person class has swollen to thousands of lines and hundreds of functions, and some marketing sleazebag comes into the office of the poor developer that has to maintain the Person class once you left the company with your millions in stock options. Marketing tells this poor slob that the new cut-off number for cougars is 15. He doesn't even know that the old number was 20 and neither do you. What do you look for? Where do you look for it? We only used the number in one place, but what if we had used it in several places? We would need to track them all down and change them all. What a pain! It would have been so much nicer if the original author had created a variable with a name like

```java
  int COUGAR_CUT_OFF = 20;
```

and put it right in the front of the class with all the other variables and stuff so that you would know where to look, and then even if it had been used in multiple places, all those places would be clearly documented by refering to a variable name rather than just a bare number. You see, the problem with the number 20 is that you can't tell just by looking at a number whether it was a COUGAR_CUT_OFF or the FRAMES_PER_SEC.

So this is a simple fix - in snogs() where we used to have:

```java
  if(this.age > (p.age + 20)){
```

we want

```java
  if(this.age > (p.age + COUGAR_CUT_OFF)){
```

and we will want the line defining COUGAR_CUT_OFF in the variables section.

BUT WAIT - there is one more tricky thing about this cut off number. Notice that it is the same for all persons. Unlike person's names that are all different, one per person, and person's ages that are one per person. There is really only one single cougar cut off. You don't need to lug a copy of this variable around with every single person that you create. This is really just one single number associated with the class of all Persons as opposed to a variable that you want in every single person. What is the Java way of associating a variable (or function) at the class level instead of at the object level?

That is the word static

The proper line to put into the front of the person class along with all the other variables in the person class is

```java
  private static int COUGAR_CUT_OFF = 20;
```

We made it private because no one outside the class needs to know about this variable. No one outside can change it on the fly. Only the programmer (or the Person class itself) could change it. It is static to mean that there is only one of these attached to the Person class itself, not one for each Person that gets created. We used ALL CAPS and underscores because it is a constant.

So I wrote this wrong in the first place so that I could come back and fix it and teach you the NO MAGIC NUMBERS rule. Ideally, you should notice this automatically when you first write the code and fix it before getting slammed in a code review. The numbers zero, one, minus one, and maybe even two are not necessarily magic, like when you are incrementing through a list, but when you find yourself typing any other number you should ask yourself, "What is this number, really? Does it need a name? Should I be creating a (probably static) variable/constant to hold this number?" The answer is almost always, "Yes!"

NO MAGIC NUMBERS!

Make the changes to Person - and test with Hello to see that you didn't break anything when you made the change.

Also, while we are on the topic of code review, there was another comment that I got from my code reviewer, that really persnickety alternate personality that I only let out of the box in my head when I am finished writing my code. My code reviewer pointed out that in the snogs() code I really did not need to be using the word this.

In those places where I compared the snogger's age with the snoggee's age I used

```java
  this.age
```

to contrast with

```java
  p.age
```

This is perfectly legal and perfectly fine, but technically, if I am NOT fighting some local variable for the name, the word "age" used all by itself in any Person function automatically gets qualified to be this.age. In other words you only really need to write

```java
  age > (p.age + COUGAR_CUT_OFF)
```

The actual criticism that came from my reviewer was, "You're teaching Java with a Javascript accent." Well this is true. Strictly Java trained folks tend to avoid use of the word this unless it is absolutely required - i.e. they know/remember/lean on the fact that Java will automatically qualify a variable name for you. Javascript never qualifies anything for you. Javascript class notation is full of the word this. So there you go. You get to learn your Java with just a whiff of a javascript accent.

Deal.

## Person.java 2.3

```java
  package hello;
  
  public class Person implements Named{
    private String first;
    private String last;
    private int age;
    private boolean cougar = false;
    private static int COUGAR_CUT_OFF = 20; // snog someone 20 years younger and become a cougar
  
    public Person(String first, String last, int age){
      this.first = first;  // user passes in f, we load it into the slot first
      this.last = last;
      this.age = age;
    }
  
    public void snogs(Person p){
      System.out.println("Holy smoke, " + this + " just snogged " + p);
      if(this.age > (p.age + COUGAR_CUT_OFF)){
        this.cougar = true;
        System.out.println("Cougar detected!");
      }
    }
  
    @Override
    public String toString(){
      return last + ", " + first + (cougar ? ", a known cougar,":"");
    }
  
    @Override
    public String name() {
      return first + " " + last;
    }
  }
```

[next: Logical Ops](Java0404.md)