## Java 1-4 Getting Starting [&LT;](Java0103.md) [&GT;](Java0105.md)
# Packages and Classes 

As mentioned previously, your project is typically a directory (a folder) and your class is typically a file.

Java wants this directory information encoded into the file itself and does so in the following way:

the word **package** is a java keyword and it identifies a directory/path name to where your class file is stored. Since 'hello' is the name of the directory where your project is kept, that is what we need in the package statement. The package statement should be the first line of your class file.

```java
  package hello;
```

Technically, you don't need a package statement, but from an organizational standpoint if you are going to build more than one thing you will want to have them organized into directories.

The next line defines the class name which is also the file name:
```java
  public class Hello {
```

the words **public** and **class** are java keywords and the word 'Hello' is the name of the class.

From these two lines I know that the class is being kept in the file:

```text
  hello/Hello.java
```

You should know that it is a Java Convention that all class names should start with a capital letter and this will distinguish them from all the other names in the system. keywords, variables, functions, directories all start with lower case letters. This is just a convention, not a requirement. Java won't complain if you don't use a capital letter to start your class name BUT human programmers will complain mightily. They will refuse to read your code or help you. They use that capital letter so that they can look at code and immediately distinguish class names from everything else.

There is a very annoying gotcha in this convention. Java REQUIRES that the class name matches the file name. Java is a  _case sensitive_ language, meaning that the letter 'a' is different from the letter 'A'. Windows, on the other hand, has a _case insensitive_ file system. As far as Windows is concerned the file Foo.txt is the same as foo.txt. As a result, if you just happen to have your class Hello (with a capital letter) stored in a file hello.java, well everything works fine on a Windows system, because when Java looks for the file Hello Windows returns the file hello. As far as you are concerned and as far as Java is concerned your filename matches your class name. BUT if you move your file to a Linux machine suddenly your perfectly working code just stops working.

Any Linux geek will explain to you that this is perfectly correct because after all, Linux is a superior operating system and it does things the RIGHT way and clearly this is a Windows problem because, after all, it is Windows and EVERYTHING that they do is wrong. Sigh.

Next we will talk about _names_, _requirements_ and _conventions_.

[next: Names](Java0105.md)