## Java 8-12 Swing [&LT;](Java0811.md) [&GT;](Java0813.md)
# Better Targets

So, if one of the problems for sharing coordinates is that we don't have good targets to click on let us think of some alternatives that would give us targets.

We could simply always paint little tick marks across the top edge and the left edge of the screen marking where the Coords actually are.

That is easy enough, just write a function something like this:

```java
  private void paintCoordTics(Graphics g){    
    int TIC_LEN = 5;    
    g.setColor(Color.GRAY);    
    for(Graph.Node n : graph.nodes){      
      Graph.Coord cx = n.x; Graph.Coord cy = n.y;      
      g.drawLine(cx.v, 0, cx.v, TIC_LEN);      
      g.drawLine(0, cy.v, TIC_LEN, cy.v);    
    }  
  }
```

and then call it from the paintComponent routine

If we didn't want to see those tick marks all the time, we could make them pop up when we move the mouse close to the edge and then have them go away when we move away from the edge. How do we get this popup behavior? Well, we would need to detect when we have gotten close to either the top or the right, so when the x or the y gets below some threshold. When we cross that threshold we want to paint the tic marks and when we move away from the edges we want to not paint the tic marks. This is also fairly easy BUT there are just a couple refinements that are worthy of noticing.

In order to do the popup we are going to have to listen to the mouseMove event, and if it moves into range do something and if it moves out of range do something. However what we don't want to do is repaint the screen every single time we move the mouse. This could cause flicker and it also wastes a lot of processor time. Clearly we want to paint the tic marks if we are in range of an edge, but we don't want to paint them if they are already painted. I mean, if a move was from in range to still being in range we don't need to repaint.

So what we want to do is to keep a flag, a boolean, telling us whether or not we should show the tic marks. We update that boolean on every mouse move BUT we only call the repaint function when we noticed that the boolean changed state, ie. we went from noShow to show or went from show to noShow.

There is one other commonly used trick when building an interface like this (which we may or may not need but it won't hurt you to learn it). If you only have a single threshold, like how close you are to the top edge, then if your mouse is right near this threshold as you jiggle your hand you are crossing and uncrossing all the time and the tic marks flicker onto and off of the screen. To prevent this noise, you can introduce two thresholds with a little space between them. Basically you have a SHOW threshold up close to the edge and the user must cross this to show the tics, then you have a different larger threshold further from the edge that is the HIDE threshold. The user must cross this to hide the tics. The two thresholds help protect you from noise in the user's input.

So where do we put all this stuff? Well, the flag to show or hide, will be set by the mouse listener but it will be consumed by the paint routine. So this flag should be a variable in the GraphUI class where the paint routine can get at it, and we are already passing the UI into the Listener so it will be able to get through the UI to see the flag.

So lets add the following to the GraphUI class

```java
  private static final int SHOW_THRESHOLD = 8;
  private static final int HIDE_THRESHOLD = 16;
  private boolean showTics = false;
```

Then we modify the paintCoordTics routine to respect the flag. A single line at the front to bail out if the flag is false will do it.

```java
  if(!showTics){return;}
```

And then all that is left is to implement the logic to set and unset the showTics flag.

```java
  @Override    
  public void mouseMoved(MouseEvent e){      
    int x = e.getX(); int y = e.getY();      
    boolean needToRepaint = false;      
    if(x < SHOW_THRESHOLD || y < SHOW_THRESHOLD){        
      if(!UI.showTics){needToRepaint = true;}        
      UI.showTics = true;      
    }      
  
    if(x > HIDE_THRESHOLD && y > HIDE_THRESHOLD){        
      if(UI.showTics){needToRepaint = true;}        
      UI.showTics = false;      
    }      
  
    if(needToRepaint){UI.repaint();}    
  }
```

[next: Summary](Java0913.md)