## Java 8-9 Swing [&LT;](Java0809.md) [&GT;](Java0810.md)
# Paint
==Paint - a first GUI app

The paint program just lets you scribble on the screen. I am not going to write all the code here, rather I will describe in outline what I had to do to write the Paint code, then you can look directly at the paint code which will follow this.

Paint, just like AAAGraphics, will need to have a constructor where we can install the listeners. It will have an inner class, ML, that will work as the listener - HOWEVER unlike AAAGraphics, Paint needs to listen to two different kinds of events. For some reason the engineers who built Swing decided to distinguish between a MouseListener, which listens to mouse clicks and motion in and out of a component, and a MouseMotionListener, which listens to MouseMotion that happens between presses and releases. If you want to capture ink, you need to know when the pen goes down to start capturing ink, and then you need to collect the coordinates as the pen (sorry, the mouse) is dragged around on the screen. So you need to listen to two things. You need to install two listeners, a MouseListener and a MouseMotionListener.

Oh gag me with a spoon!

Ok, calm down, it isn't that bad, at least we don't have to build two inner classes any more. We can just build one. Someone noticed what a bag this design was and introduced a third interface, MouseInputListener, which is a combo of the MouseListener and the MouseMotionListener and similarly created a MouseInputAdapter which likewise implements both. So in Paint we will create an inner class ML which extends MouseInputAdapter, we will implement (override) mousePressed and mouseDragged and in the constructor to paint we will create a single ML object and install it two ways, making it both the mouseListener and the mouseMotionListener.

(Actually, I take it all back - it is absolutely STUPID to have split the mouse out that way - I don't want to tell you how many HOURS I have wasted in my life, wondering why my mouseDrag code is just NOT working. You look at the code. There is nothing wrong with it. Did I forget to install it? No there it is - addMouseListener(); - OH wait, I only added the MouseListener, I didn't add it a second time as the MouseMotionListener as well - I am only getting the click events, I never even see the drag, my code isn't even being called. !*#^&@ Java &#&(@! - take a breath - smell the roses!)

Our Paint class needs to implement paintComponent, so that every time the window is uncovered we can get back whatever we drew on it previously. This means we need to save every line that was ever drawn on the screen so that we can rip though all of them and redraw them.

That is easy enough, we will keep an ArrayList of Ink to keep track of each Ink trace that was drawn on the screen. There is no such thing as an Ink trace, so we have to build that too. We will build an inner class Ink, where Ink is a single list of points keeping track of a single drag from mouse down to mouse up.

Fortunately someone did already build a Point class so we don't need to build that from scratch. A Point isn't a very sophisticated class, it is just a bucket that holds two integers named x and y.

Our Ink class is fairly simple. It is a single ArrayList<Point> and it will implement only two function, one to add a new Point onto the end of the ArrayList and a second one to "draw" the line on a Graphics object. Notice that the loop in our draw routine does not start at zero - that is because each line draw runs between two points, we start our loop at one and for each index we draw from index minus one up to index. 

This is sometimes called a "fence post" problem. A fence with 3 posts, will have only two rails, a loop that enumerates the posts goes 3 times, a loop that enumerates the rails needs to go only two times. That is why we start at one instead of zero as we usually do. These "fencepost" problems also occur when you are writing out a coma separated list, 3 items on the list (the posts) has only 2 commas (the rails). It's not really a problem in that the solution is easy, rather it is a pattern, something to see and recognize.

So our Ink will be able to draw itself to the screen, and our paintComponent function in Paint becomes a single loop through the list of Inks telling each Ink object to draw itself.

Our mouse functions have very little to do. Basically when you press the mouse down, that is the moment that you create a new Ink object. You hang onto that object, adding points to it over in the mouseDrag routine. At the moment that you create the new Ink Object, you want to add it to the lines immediately (even though it doesn't have any points in it) because the only way that anything shows up on the the screen in our Paint app is through the paintComponent and the only thing that paintComponent knows about is the list of lines. If you don't add the line to the list until the mouseRelease when the ink is finished, you wouldn't see the line while it is being drawn.

Now it is time to talk about thePanel

Basically, Windows tells us when to repaint the screen, whenever some portion of it has been uncovered. Well if you just have your window open it is already completely uncovered. You won't be getting an paintComponent calls from Windows. You need to force a repaint of the screen when you changed the ink. The drag happened, extended a line and that is when you need to get the screen repainted. (you are of course doing the standard windows thing - you got one event, a mouse drag, you did a little work, and now you need to upgrade the event into a bigger one - "Dude, repaint the screen"

So here is the problem. Who repaints the screen? Well any swing component can ask for a repaint - BUT here we are down in a lowly MouseListener when the event happened. We aren't a Swing component. We are not a Panel or a Container or a Button, we are just a MouseListener. We need to grab ahold of a panel somewhere and ask him to pass on the repaint message. 

The quick and dirty thing, (and surprisingly common thing) is to recognize that in this cheezy little application, we are only building a single Paint panel. As you know, in a situation where you only have one single thing, you can put that single thing into a static variable owned by a class and not by an object. It is always easy to get to a static object. So we let the Paint constructor create the one single Panel that we will ever create, and shove it into that static variable, thePanel. NOW when we want to get out hands on the one single Paint panel that we will ever create we can just go to Paint.thePanel and there it is. An alternative would have been to allow an ML object to hang onto a Panel, then when we created the ML object (up in the Paint constructor) and when we installed the ML object as a listener, we could have installed the Paint panel into the ML object so that the ML guy had access to the Panel so that he could ask it to repaint.

As I said, what I did was the quick and dirty thing. Generally in your designs, objects should carry around the stuff that they need. This is how things should work. Information flows like sap from the trunk to the branches to the leaves, but every once in a while, you need to get back to the trunk. If you have but one single trunk and from there you can get to anything it is sometimes just easier to put the trunk into a static variable so that every class can go to Application.theApp and start at the root of it all. Of course, if you do it that way, you will not have an app that can have multiple panels all open at the same time. It's your app, it's your choice.

Summary before you look at the code.
  1. ML extends MouseInputAdapter which does both MouseListening and MouseMotionListening
  2. install ML both as mouseListener and mouseMotionListener
  2. Ink is a list of Points that can be extened by a new point and can draw itself
  2. Paint objects are a list of Ink objects and all it ever does is redraw the entire list when asked
  2. MousePress starts up a new Ink object and installs it onto the lines list
  2. MouseDrag extends the current Ink object and repaints
  2. When you construct a Paint object, shove it into a static var, thePanel so that we can get to it from anywhere.

## Paint.java

```java
  package HelloSwing;
  
  import java.awt.Graphics;
  import java.awt.Point;
  import java.awt.event.MouseEvent;
  import java.util.ArrayList;
  import javax.swing.JPanel;
  import javax.swing.event.MouseInputAdapter;
  
  public class Paint extends JPanel{
    public static Paint thePanel;
    ArrayList<Ink> lines = new ArrayList<>();
  
    public Paint(){
      thePanel = this;
      ML ml = new ML();
      this.addMouseListener(ml);
      this.addMouseMotionListener(ml);
    }
  
    @Override
    public void paintComponent(Graphics g){
      for(int i = 0; i<lines.size(); i++){lines.get(i).draw(g);}
    }
  
    // ---------- helper class Ink -----------
    public static class Ink{
      ArrayList<Point> points = new ArrayList<>();
  
      private void add(int x, int y){points.add(new Point(x,y));}
  
      private void draw(Graphics g){
        for(int i = 1; i<points.size(); i++){
          g.drawLine(points.get(i-1).x, points.get(i-1).y, points.get(i).x, points.get(i).y);
        }
      }
    }
  
    // ------ Mouse Listener ----------
    public static class ML extends MouseInputAdapter{
      Ink ink; // holds the line of ink we are currently working on
  
      @Override
      public void mousePressed(MouseEvent e){
        ink = new Ink(); // create a new buffer for a new line
        thePanel.lines.add(ink); // put it in the lines so that it will paint
        ink.add(e.getX(), e.getY());
      }
  
      @Override
      public void mouseDragged(MouseEvent e){
        ink.add(e.getX(), e.getY());
        thePanel.repaint(); // make it show up
      }
    }
  }
```

[next: Graph Editor](Java0810.md)