## Java 1-3 Getting Starting [&LT;](Java0102.md) [&GT;](Java0104.md)
# Comments 

In the code that you write you occasionally wish to leave **comments** to tell others (or remind yourself) what you were doing in the code. i.e. you want to put in some text that is ONLY for human consumption and is NOT Java.

Those are called comments and in Java they occur in three forms:

1. **End of Line Comments** - two slashes, **//** , start an end of line comment and everything that follows the two slashes up to the end of the line is ignored by the Java compiler. These comments necessarily fit on a single line.
2. **Block Comments** - if you want a comment on multiple lines you start it with slash-star, **/*** and everything is a comment until you have a star-slash, ***/**. Block comments clearly can be used to span multiple lines.
2. **JavaDoc Comments** - technically these are just like the block comments in that they start with a slash-star and end with a star-slash and thus span multiple lines. The difference is that you actually start with a slash-star-star, /**. 

The extra star at the start tells the system that that comment, unlike any of the other comments that you put in your code, was actually intended for publication. There is a publication tool that comes with the JDK (called JavaDoc - hence the name JavaDoc Comments) that will read your .java files, extract the JavaDoc comments and format them into HTML files for publication on the Web.

Java does not care about the extra star in the block comment. In fact, Java doesn't even see that second star because java throws out everything between the /* and the */. JavaDoc, that extra other piece of utility code, is in some sense the reverse of that. In a sense, it throws out all of the java code and it throws out all of the comments UNLESS that comment has a second star. Those are the only ones that it see and the only ones that it will turn into HTML documentation.

##  Hello World w/ Comments

```java
package projects.hello;
/** Hello is the class used to test the installation of
both the IDE and the JDK. It will also be used as a 'sandbox' main, 
meaning that we will change it whenever we want so that we can test something.
*/
class Hello{
  public static void main(String[] args){ 
    System.out.println("Hello, World!");  // print msg
  }
}
```

Later on when we point you at the Java API documentation you will see many examples of the sort of thing that can be produced with JavaDoc. It is a very useful tool and we encourage its use, but right at the moment while you are still just messing around and learning to program you can ignore JavaDoc comments within your code.

There is one other useful feature of comments that programmers typically use. Suppose you have written some code, but it does not work and you need to change a few lines of code. You want to rewrite but don't want to delete the old lines until the new ones are working so rather than delete the old code, you can comment them out by wrapping them with /* and */. Java will no longer include them as code in your program, but you can still see them and restore them if need be.

Note: you cannot nest block comments in Java. Why would you ever want that? Well, you might want that to enable the use I just described. Suppose you have several routines that you wish to comment out. One big block comment around the entire thing would work, UNLESS you have little block comments (or javaDoc comments which are the same thing) scattered throughout the code. This desired usage of the commenting system is not actually documentation. It is version control, helping you remember previous versions of code. However this usage is common and it puts pressure on a programmer to NOT use block comments in code as it is being developed. One can either assume that the developers of Java did not think this through, or if one is generous, one can assume that they had an outstanding version control system that made this sort of abuse of the block comment entirely unnecessary. 

Another common usage of comments: Once again, during debugging you had several lines of code that weren't working the way you thought they should. So you interspersed some print statements throughout those lines of code to print out some intermediate values along the way so that you could see what was going on. Looking at the output of those print statements, you saw what your error was and fixed it. You now no longer need those print statements. You could just rip them out - BUT - it took you time to type them in, it took you time to think of what values would help you debug this broken code and being a superstitious programmer, you worry that since you made a mistake in this tricky code once you might still have another bug lurking there. So instead of deleting them you just comment out your print statements.

This usage is also NOT documentation. Well not exactly. It IS documentation telling you that you used to have a bug and had to print out some value at some time in the past. The commented line is left there so that if you have bugs again you can uncomment the line and look at the value once again. So this comment is actually dead debug code - the ghost of a former bug.

In theory, you are supposed to actually document any tricky code that you write. (Actually in theory you are supposed to avoid writing tricky code altogether.) What this means is, you think through the code, you build it the way that you think you should, you test it and find that it doesn't work, you track down the mistake and realize that you had some issue that you didn't think about and your code doesn't deal with. So you now deal with that issue and you comment something like why it wasn't obvious to you in the very first pass and why you needed to deal with that issue later. You are basically trying to help the person that is reading your code to understand why you built it the way that you did.

Basic programming etiquette is to comment the code that you had to add later, or that was somewhat obscure. Generally we don't bother commenting on the code that is obvious.

But what is obvious code? Well, eventually, all of it is, to you, the author of the code. Which is why most people don't comment their code at all. Miss Manners would  be ashamed.

There is one other point that it is useful to make about comments which is that the CODE is what is running, NOT the comments. If you want to know what the code is doing, you MUST read the code, not the comments that express what someone WANTED the code to do, or HOPED that the code would do. People rewrite code all the time, but the seldom rewrite the comments. So yeah, by all means, look at the comments when you are trying to learn some new block of code, but The code IS the code and comments may either be, INSIGHT into, or LIES about, the code, you will NOT know which until you actually read the code.

Commenting will not be required in this course, it is encouraged, just not required. You will need to know what it is so you won't be confused when you see them in real code. You probably will find yourself using them for the two non-documenting purposes that I mentioned. The sample code that I produce will occasionally have some comments as well, but considering the fact that I am writing tons of comments over here on these web pages, explaining why I made my code choices, the code samples that I will post are particularly spartan, maybe unnecessarily so. I am primarily a member of the school that encourages you to write self-documenting code - this is code that is just so beautiful, elegant, clear, simple and precise that any additional comments would merely obscure the actual workings of the code itself. Strive to make it so!

[next: Packages and Classes](Java0104.md)