## Java 6-9 Mastermind [&LT;](Java0608.md) [&GT;](Java0701.md)
# Summary

In this section we learned more about class inheritance, how every class has a parent class, how to use super to get at your parent's constructor. We learned that abstract classes are ones that contain even a single abstract function, meaning a function that is lacking in an implementation. We learned that an abstract class can not be instanciated with new because it is not yet complete but that an abstract class is a valid type, we can have variables whose type is the abstract class. We learned that abstract classes are used to do something that interfaces can't, namely to hold code. We learned that a common design principle is to collect common code into an abstract class, and then we can build classes that are just small varients on that abstraction by making them extensions of that abstract class.

We also saw that we could have inner classes in cases where we need a small class that is just a helper for the class that it lives in.

We learned a bit about integer math, how it differs from human math, and how the primary difference is in the way that it does division. (We have NOT yet looked at all the ways that computer decimal math doesn't match up with human decimal math). We met the 4 variants of the "plus-equals" operator.

keywords: I've greyed out the ones we won't be covering. Only a few left. 

0. _Structures_ - **class interface** enum
2. _StructuralMods_ - **package import extends implements** throws
2. _PrimitiveTypes_ - **char boolean int long byte short double float void**
2. _AccessModifiers_ - **public private protected**
2. _Modifiers_ - **static abstract final** synchronized transient native strictfp volatile
2. _Unimplemented_ - goto_const
2. --Control--
2. &nbsp;&nbsp; _Guards_ - **if else** switch case default
2. &nbsp;&nbsp; _Loops_ - **for while** do
2. &nbsp;&nbsp; _Destinations_ - try catch finally
2. _Misc_ - **new this super** instanceof


One of the other things that we covered in this section is the notion that you will typically have several classes all working together to do something. The code you write will live in those classes. The decision of what code lives where is sometimes obvious - this function only works with things of type Foo, it belongs in the Foo class - but other times, the decision was arbitrary. This is because fundamentally classes are your organizational design. They are your dresser drawers, and your car trunk and your closet. Classes hold your stuff. The purpose of organization is to simplify your life, quick where is the spare tire - is it up in your closet? Did you leave it in the bathroom? For some things the location is obvious, for others - the choice will not be obvious. Don't worry too much if you have some notions that don't fit in obvious places. Put them somewhere and remember where you put them. If you get too many things that don't have an obvious location that is when you can start to wonder if your ogranizational method is flawed.

In this section we built a helper function Hist. We could have done without and it wouldn't have changed the complexity very much. I gave that example mostly to show you how to use inner classes, but the reason for that class was real. I saw something being repeated and my Object Oriented reflex is: "I wonder if I can collect that notion into a single class and put everything that relates to that notion in that class". Classes are boxes to put stuff in. That is what organization is all about, figuring out places to put things, in such a way that it is easy to find and get at anything you need.

The hist array, the digits array, were there for exactly the same organizational reasons. The hist gave me a place to store the count of how many 7s I see in a hidden number. Being able to get at all those numbers and being able to sum them up conveniently helps in the calcualtion.

To me, this ability to design things, to organize things is of far more importance that the particulars of the Java language. Yes, I am teaching you Java here, but what I care about, and the reason I am showing you code is so that you can see lots of examples of organization.

We are nearly done, with the Java Language portion of this course. Exception handling is the only major thing left to do. After that you will know all the Lego bricks that you have at your disposal. After that, the only thing left to do is more examples - organizations that work for various different types of problems. When we get there, I mean after this intro portion, the course will branch out - it will stop being a linear system where you must learn this before you learn that. It will split into different courses. Do you want to do some scientific programming? Here are some of those tricks. Do you want to write games? Do you want to do graphics? Artifical Intelligence? Word processors? You could do any or all of those. Each field has its own useful tricks, but for the most part, you don't need to know how to write games in order to write AI code and you don't need to write AI in order to do games. You could learn either one in either order - BUT once you know both, you could like, build a game WITH an AI opponent. Sweet indeed!

[next: Disk Files](Java0701.md)