## Java 6-5 Mastermind [&LT;](Java0604.md) [&GT;](Java0606.md)
#  Static Nested Classes

OK let's wade into the meat of the problem. Each round we need to calculate the cow and the bulls. We will need a place to store those two numbers to show the user. That is pretty easy to define. In Mastermind add:

```java
  private int cows;
  private int bulls;
```

How do we calculate these two important numbers? In order to talk about how many digits match between two numbers, we will clearly need to be able to count the digits. This means that we need to think of the hidden number not just as a single number (the way that it comes from the user or from the random number generator) but rather as a list or an array of digits. Instead of thinking of 1232 as the number "one thousand two hundred thirty two" but rather as "a one, a two, and a three, followed by another two." Instead of

```java
  int x = 1234;
```

it will be

```java
  int[] x = {1, 2, 3, 4};
```

And while we are at it, we also need to hold onto a number that is the user's guess as well because cows and bulls are all about comparing these two numbers. So we will want an array of 4 integers for each number:

```java
  private int[] hid = new int[4]; // the hidden number
  private int[] guess = new int[4]; // the user's guess
```

The other thing that will be convenient in our calculation is to be able to have a count of how many 7s we saw in the number. We actually want a separate count for each digit. This is basically a histogram so we will used the name hist and make two other variables:

```java
  private int[] hidHist = new int[10]; 
  private int[] guessHist = new int[10];
```

Those line that I just typed make my spider-sense tingle. There is some trouble brewing here. Did they bug you too? I hope so. Look at those Magic numbers 4 and 10. BAD! Let's wrap them up and give them names.

Let us call the number of digits used in the puzzle N, (Some die-hard programmers will criticize me for using such a short non-descriptive name. They would want me to use NUMBER_OF_DIGITS or some such self-documenting thing. I am sympathetic to that viewpoint. I used the short name because I trained as a mathematician first and learned to use short single letter names like x and y and pi and n and p for nearly everything. I still do it in my code. I probably shouldn't - but unfortunately being the oldest programmer here they made me the boss so I will be code reviewing your code and not the other way around. Fact is, you should try it both ways and see what looks more clear to you- after all clarity is the goal!)

What should we call the other number, the 10? Where did that number 10 come from? Well, there are 10 possible digits, from 0 to 9, AH - there really is only one decent name for that: RADIX (or NUMBER_BASE if you prefer). That is what Radix means, how many digits do you have in your representation of numbers. So those lines should have been: 


```java
  private static int N = 4; // Number of digits
  private static int RADIX = 10; // Number of possibilities for each digit
  
  private int[] hid = new int[N];
  private int[] hidHist = new int[RADIX];
  
  private int[] guess = new int[N];
  private int[] guessHist = new int[RADIX];
```

That looks better but it is still not the best that it can be. The clue is in the repeated pattern, I have hid and hidHist, then I have guess and guessHist, both defined in exactly the same way. Once is a conincidence, Twice is a class waiting to be defined. I would like to instead have a new type of object FOO with two members one an int[N] and the other an int[RADIX] and then I can do something more like

```java
  Foo hid;
  Foo guess;
```

and then when I need to I can talk about hid.digits, and hid.hist or guess.digits and guess.hist

By creating a new helper class to deal with this regularity I can presumably save code, for example when I need to load a number into the digits of hid or the digits of guess and when I calculate the histogram of either one.

Well Foo is not really a name. It is a meta-name used by programmers to talk about something that eventually needs a name but without wasting the time to think up a name first. Now that we have decided that we want this helper class we need to give it a name. What shall we call it. I think I will call this class Hist even though it will hold both the digits and the histogram. I could use NetBeans to create a new class file just like we have done with all the others but in this case I am going to do something just a tiny bit different and introduce you to a Nested Class.

Static Nested Classes are pretty much like any other class, the primary difference being where you locate them. Instead of having a file all of its own, an nested class lives inside of another class. The other difference, and the main reason that you would use a nested class, is that the Class really has no usage outside of the class that it lives in. It really is just a helper for this class. Hist is so specific to this one single use in the Mastermind class that I can't imagine connecting to it from anywhere else. That makes it a candidate for making it a Nested class.

The class itself will look much like any other class. I would define Hist like this:

```java
  public class Mastermind extends Game{
    ...
    //------------------HIST-----------------------------
    private static class Hist{
      private int[] digits = new int[N];
      private int[] hist = new int[RADIX];
      ...
    }
  }
```

I tend to put my helper classes at the bottom of a class rather than up at the top. I also alway put in a LONG breaking comment so that it is easy to see where you have shoved in a Nested class. Old Pascal programmers tend to speak with a Pascal accent and put their helpers at the front because that was required in the Pascal language. It doesn't matter except that in any given shop they will generally have a house style that demands that you do it their way. It doesn't matter which you do but there is GREAT benefit in being consistent because then you always know where to look in a file if you are looking for a helper class.

An static nested class looks pretty much like any other class that you have defined. The only difference is that it was declared <b>static</b> and it was tucked inside another class. The FULL name of this class is actually Mastermind.Hist (if we had made it public so that outside folks could see it, they would need to refer to it as Mastermind.Hist - however while we are inside the Mastermind class we can just use the unqualified name, Hist).

You have not seen me declare a class as static before. That happens here because this class is being defined inside another class. Everything that gets defined in a class must be either static or non-static, there is either a single one of them attached to the class or there is something stuck onto each object that is created by the class. While we will have multiple Hist objects, hid and guess, we do NOT need multiple copies of the class itself - so we make it static. You are allowed to have non-static inner classes but we will not use them in this course. If you are interested you can google and browse. 

Just as an extra warning, I used to call these static nested classes, 'inner classes' which is EXACTLY WRONG! I had read about nested classes and inner classes and later, in my head, got the names 'nested' and 'inner' mixed up. I BELIEVE that I have edited this entire course to NEVER say 'inner class' when what I mean is 'static nested class'. BUT in case I failed in those edits, do NOT go away thinking that 'inner class' is just another name for 'nested class' - an inner class is a particular KIND of nested class, it is a 'non-static nested class'. The only ones that we are using in this course are 'static nested classes'.

Next we will look into the problem of setting up a Hist object, filling in the digits and the hist.

[next: Integer Math](Java0606.md)