## Java 7-1 Disk Files [&LT;](Java0609.md) [&GT;](Java0702.md)
# Exception Handling

Exceptions and exception handling is the way that we deal with uncommon circumstances or certain types of errors in our code.

The classic examples of exceptional circumstances happen when you are doing input and output to something like a disk or a file system. Generally you can read and write files with no problem, but what do you do if you are writing to a disk and suddenly it is completely full? Disk full is an exceptional circumstance. What are your choices? In very broad terms there are only two things you can do. You can either just fail, possibly telling someone that you are failing, OR perhaps there is some way you can deal with the error - like for example taking the user to some code that allows them to remove or delete some files.

Notice that this decision to either do nothing or to do something can come in layers in your code - i.e. some code in your system may be unable to do anything other than report that an error/exceptional circumstance has happened whereas other code may be able to do something.

For example; a general FileWriter class that just reads and writes to files, may well detect that the disk is full but be unable to do anything about it. This class is perhaps too low level to know if the class that called it is some application running with a user sitting at a console or if instead it is some robot code running in the middle of the night on a server somewhere. That class could just report or "throw" a DiskFUll exception when it detects it. Whereas some code at a higher level may know that we have a user on-board and a computer screen, and hey, even a window and everything so we can just present the user with some options and work around the difficulty.

The Exception handling mechanism in Java is built around this notion of having two possibilities for dealing with exceptions - failure to deal with an exception is called "throwing" and dealing with an exception is called catching.

What we do is this; The low level code that writes to a file is probably in some function, maybe writeToFile(), in some class. That function has some way of detecting that the disk is full and when it is full, it can call a throw command to throw an exception. Something like:

```java
  throw new DiskFull();
```

As soon as you do that, as soon as you have a throw statement in the writeToDisk() function, NetBeans will complain that you are throwing an error in the function but did not declare it in the signature. The Java requirement is that if a function can throw an exception it must declare that possibility up in the function signature with a throws clause. That looks like this:

```java
  public void writeToDisk(String someString) throws DiskFull { ... }
```

If the code can throw multiple exceptions you must name them all in the declaration separated by commas

```java
  ...throws Ex1, Ex2, DiskFull, FileNotFound { ...
```

This declaration is detected by Java and ripples all the way to the top of any program. What I mean is that now that Java KNOWS that writeToDisk can throw an exception then suddenly any function that calls writeToDisk is likewise able to fail/throw those same exceptions and therefore MUST declare that it throws those same exceptions. The errors, or rather the possibility of errors flows all the way to the top (that would be main())UNLESS some function along the way decides to "catch" the error or catch the exception.

The way that you catch the exception is with a control structure know as a "try catch block" that would look like this:


```java  ...
  try{
    // this is the try block. Any code that could fail, should be in this block. 
    // You are "trying" it out to see if it works. If it works, great - 
    // If it works you will skip ALL the catch blocks at the end, however
    // if there is a 'finally' block you WILL do that - you ALWAYS do finally blocks
  } catch (DiskFull e){
    // If any code in the try block throws a DiskFull..
    // ..the try code immediately stopped and you end up right here..
    // ..to deal with the DiskFull possibility. 
    // When you are finished with this catch block
    // you skip all the other catch blocks..
    // ..but you WILL ALWAYS do the finally block if there is one
  } catch (FileNotFound e){
    // this is a catch block for a different error.
    // You can have as many catch blocks as you need..
    // ..each one dealing with one single error. Or...
  } catch (Exception e){     
    // ... OR you could just capture all of them by using the superclass.. 
    // ..meaning you don't really care to distinguish  between types of errors.
    // You would probably only put this catch block if you didn't use the specific catch blocks.
    // The very general catch is primarily used if you intend to just print a message and exit.
  } finally { 
    // The finally block is OPTIONAL as the LAST thing in a try catch block.
    // If it exist, it WILL be executed.    
  }
```
  
The "finally" block exists so that you can deal with required clean up regardless of the path of errors that was taken. For example the try block could lock something, and you MUST unlock before you leave regardless of whatever error path through the code you might have taken. I have never needed a finally block in any code I have ever written and probably you won't need it either so I will say no more. 

In case you couldn't tell from the Capitalization, DiskFull is a class. It happens to inherit from Exception, which is a basic class provide by Java much like String. The thing in the parenthesis on the actual catch line was declaring a variable named e that is of type DiskFull. Basically when you are inside the catch block you will have that variable e available to you. You could look inside the e object and find more information about the type of error that we are dealing with here.

You see, exceptions are objects, your code that threw an exception could create its own subclass of Exception and then pack as much information as it wants into that object so that whoever is catching it can deal with it in the best way possible. The generic Exception class, which is often adequate, has an error message in it so that it is easy to just halt execution and print the error message.

When the exception happens, the try block stops where ever it was, and it just scans through all the catch blocks to find the first one that fits the type of exception that got thrown.

It is entirely possible to be employed as a Java programmer for years and never once need to write an exception class and to never once throw a single exception, so I am not going to go into the details about how to create and throw exceptions. However if you ever read or write a file from disk, you MUST know about try/catch blocks because ALL the significant file IO classes can throw exceptions - when the disks are full, or files are not found, or drives have failed and something timed out, or thumb drives become unplugged while you were writing or whatever. In the next section we will do some simple file IO (Input and Output) and show you how to actually use the try/catch block.

The main take away that you should get from this theoretical discussion of exception handling is this:

When you are inside a function and you call a routine that has declared that it can throw an exception YOU have only two choices: 1) you either put that call in a try block and catch that exception or 2) you declare that you throw that exception yourself. You must either deal with it (try/catch) or announce (throws) that you are NOT going to deal with it.

The 5 new keywords of Java we just saw to deal with exception handling are: !nthrows - in order to declare that you won't deal with an exception, !ntry - to wrap up code that can throw exceptions, !ncatch - to deal with an exception, !nthrow - in order to generate a new exception, to STOP whatever you were doing and transfer control to the nearest catch block in your call chain that handles that exception, and finally - location of any required clean up code.

I used the phrase !ncall_chain without defining it. If function A calls function B which then calls C, your call chain is just ABC. If you throw an exception in C - C has two possibilities it can either wrap the throw in a try/catch block and catch its own exception OR it can declare that it throws the exception. If it declared that it throws the exception, well then at the moment of throwing, it went back to B, who did the same thing - either B wrapped the call to C in a try block and caught the exception or B declared that it throws the exception back to A.

So you could have catch blocks all through the chain and the one that gets it is the nearest one to C working backwards along the call chain. The call chain just unwinds to the nearest relevant catch block.

Now lets write some File processing code.

[next: Liz and Dick](Java0702.md)