## Java 5-6 Arrays and Loops [&LT;](Java0505.md) [&GT;](Java0601.md)
# Summary

We have now seen much of what the base language Java can do.

We have looked at classes and interfaces (and have skipped enums so far.)

We know that classes can be abstract and that interfaces are completely abstract in that they define signatures but don't have implementations.

We know that static items are attached to classes NOT to objects, and thus you refer to static members ("member" is just a word for either a variable or a function) differently than the way you refer to object members.

We know that there are a bunch of primitive types like int, char, boolean, double that don't behave like objects (because they're primitive.)

We have seen most of the Java 'control' structures ('control' meaning where your code flows to next:)

**if then else** - control allows you to conditionally choose one or another block of code to execute (We have not yet covered the two ways to choose a single block of code out of more than two blocks. There are two methods for that - elseif structures and switch/case/default structures)

**for while** Loops - we have seen one: the for loop in two different forms- one for walking arrays and one for walking collections. (We mentioned but have not yet looked at the while loop which is the other main loop.)

**return** We have seen the return statement which exits a subroutine and returns a value back to the code that called the routine.

Technically, calling a function is also a control transfer because we left the code we were on, went and did the function code and then returned.

So once again here is the keyword map, with the words we have covered marked

0. _Structures_ - **class interface** enum
2. _StructuralMods_ - **package import extends implements** throws
2. _PrimitiveTypes_ - **char boolean int long byte short double float void**
2. _AccessModifiers_ - **public private protected**
2. _Modifiers_ - **static abstract final** synchronized transient native strictfp volatile
2. _Unimplemented_ - goto const
2. --Control--
2. &nbsp;&nbsp; _Guards_ - **if else** switch case default
2. &nbsp;&nbsp; _Loops_ - **for while** do
2. &nbsp;&nbsp; _Destinations_ - try catch finally
2. _Misc_ - **new this** super instanceof


We have learned about polymorphism, overrides, contracts and signatures. We know class constructors, declaring things public or private, know the difference between static and non-static elements, and know that "this" is a local variable inside of an object function that refers to the object that invoked the call.

We have looked at arrays, and a couple of collections(ArrayList and Map) and also at loops for going through these structures.

We have been augmenting and refactoring our Person and our Animal class from day one.

Just a bit more to go and you will have covered the basic language and be at the point where you can branch out into different areas. If you have made it this far, congratulate yourself - you have endured most of the boring stuff - learning the names of the basic building blocks. 

From here on out, you will still be learning stuff, BUT we get to spend more time building stuff rather than just learning why cement is different from wood. So far you have been learning about construction materials. We are now basically ready to move on to architecture where you use those building materials to makes stuff. We get to start using our cement and wood to build cathedrals and castles, computer games and flash card systems.

[next: Mastermind](Java0601.md)