## Java 8-1 Swing [&LT;](Java0801.md) [&GT;](Java0802.md)
# Swing - Java's GUI

Swing is java's Graphical User Interface or GUI.

Now that we have covered a large part of Java's built in structures and keywords, we are ready to start exploring the vast library.  In particular, we are ready to wade into Swing, which is Java's verion of Windows. It is time to get off of these little command line applications whose only output device is System.out.println() - convenient if you only want to output text, or if you happen to still be running on a teletype machine or punched cards. Time to start writing applications that open windows, have menus and dialog boxes and run like real applications.

Java actually has rewritten windows at least twice. The first time it was called AWT for Abstract Windows Toolkit, and then it got re-written as Swing. I mention this at the outset because you will find that while most of the classes that we will be calling come from Swing, some of them still come from their old counterparts in AWT. It is probably also worth mentioning that the reason Java rewrote windows is that the folks at Java did not want to be bound to running on one of those Microsoft or Apple boxes, that each had their own windowing environment, rather they wanted to provide their own so that their customers are sheltered from learning the ins and outs of anything that Microsoft or Apple do - they can just learn Java's Swing classes and use them to do stuff and it would work on either machine.

Of course, once they did, a Java app, running on it own windows framework with its own icons and its own scroll bars, didn't either look like or behave like a Windows or an Apple app. It looked like and behaved like a AWT app. In the days before people skinned apps and made them look different just for fun, this was considered a disincentive to use those apps. So Java went further and developed Look-And-Feel classes so that when you needed a scroll bar, you could tell the system that you wanted it to use an actual windows ScrollBar or an actual Apple ScrollBar or a madeUpVirtualAWTScrollBar or a MetalScrollBar.

In short, they did the same thing that everyone does when they write a Windows system (sorry, when they write a windows system - I mean the generic term, not the trademarked term) - namely, you write it once, then you write it again and load whatever crap people complain about into the new version, then you rewrite it again to break all the old apps so that developers can keep their jobs by rewriting their windows code, they you rewrite it again to make it convenient for users and introduce a bunch of security loopholes, then you rewrite it it fill in the security loopholes, pissing off all your customers who now have to sign their name every time they want to do something, and then, just for fun you rewrite windows - because it's there!

The reason for this digression is that, in keeping with this fine tradition of perpetually rewriting the windows system, we will be doing the same. At any point in time you only need a tiny portion of the overall system. And the less junk in your code, the less junk that you need to maintain. You can do Look and Feel apps in Java, and the Java tutorials will tell you how to do that. I personally could not care less about the look and feel. So naturally, in the code that I write I will never set the look and feel to anything different from the default, (unless of course it turns out that I need to).

A whole lot of the Swing Tutorials available at Oracle, and a whole lot of the thrust of windows systems seems to be on teaching you how to build menus and dialog boxes, and how to place buttons and text boxes is specific places on the screen. IF what you intend to do is write Word Processors and Spreadsheet application and realtime Video editors - that is what you will be doing - building dialog boxes and prompting the user for stuff.

On the other hand, if what you are building is a game, for the most part you don't WANT it to look like a windows app. Where's the fun in that? Your customers want to start shooting aliens, or breaking bricks, or baking cakes or whatever - immediately! Even in those games, when the gamer gets to choose what level of play they want to use, you DON'T pop up some little Windows dialog with little radio buttons and san-serif font lables - This is a game. We want da font dat drips blood!

So almost all of those widgets, radio buttons, menus, dialogs, scrollbars, as they are currently implemented in Windows, Apple, Swing, Linux, - being designed by and for people that work in offices instead of spending the day skatebording or video gamming - are pretty close to useless. AND THIS IS NOT A BAD THING - it means we get to ... rewrite the windowing system. Sweet!

OK - so maybe that was a bit extreme. IF you want to learn about menus and dialogs and all the stuff that NetBeans does for you to help you build that stuff, you should work through the Java Swing Tutorials and see what they have to say. I did that once years ago. You learn a lot. Then you forget most of it when you find that it is mostly rrelevant to what you are actually trying to do. Because I am an OLD Windows guy, I KNOW that there is nothing magical about windows. It is just a pile of code that you can take or leave. If you need something you can - grovel through the documents and try to find an already written version that does something close to what you want (and this is always the proper first step - always, walk the aisles of the hardware store to remind yourself of what tools already exist) BUT sometimes you will get something closer to what you want if you just write it from scratch.

What I will do in this guide through Swing is to point out the TINY handful of stuff that I have found that gets me by with what I want to do. In rough outline here are the things that we need to be able to do.
  1. Graphics - you need to be able to put things on the screen, both text and graphical elements like lines and rectangles and surfaces and images.
  2. Mouse Input - you need to be able to read in where the mouse is and detect when the user clicks on something.
  2. Keyboard Input - you occasionally need to know what the user is typing AS it is being typed (unlike Scanner which handed you an entire typed line)
  2. Animation & clocks - you need to learn how to repaint the screen every clock tick so it looks like things are moving
  2. Serialization - you need to learn how to take state (like an entire WordDocument) and save it to or read it from a file - i.e. let your app resume where it was.
  

I will be actively Minimizing the amount of Swing that I teach you, not because there is anything wrong with the many other things that Swing can do but because there are so many other things that we could be taking a look at. I want you to know the basics of Swing and to see how you can start crafting stuff of your own.

The first thing we are going to do is to create a project HelloSwing, which we will chop up like we did in our first hello project to introduce the basics of swing. So create the Project HelloSwing, open up the next file in this doc, paste it in, run it, see the little HelloWorld window and then we will talk about what is in that code.

## HelloSwing 1.0

```java
  package HelloSwing;
  
  import javax.swing.JFrame;
  import javax.swing.JLabel;
  
  public class HelloSwing {
  
    private static void createAndShowGUI() {
      JFrame frame = new JFrame("Swing App");
      frame.setDefaultCloseOperation(JFrame.EXIT_ON_CLOSE);
      JLabel label = new JLabel("Hello World");
      frame.getContentPane().add(label);
      frame.pack();
      frame.setVisible(true);
    }
    public static void main(String[] args) {
      javax.swing.SwingUtilities.invokeLater(
        new Runnable(){public void run(){createAndShowGUI();}}
      );
    }
  }
```

[next: Minimal Swing](Java0802.md)