## Java 2-8 Structured Data [&LT;](Java0207.md) [&GT;](Java0301.md)
# Chapter 2 Summary  

As a rough reminder of our progress here once again is the list of java keywords with the ones we've looked at highlighted. And after that is a list of some general OOP (Object Oriented Programming) vocabulary that we have seen.

keywords:

0. Structures - **class** interface enum
2. StructuralMods - **package** import extends implements throws
2. PrimitiveTypes - char, boolean, **int** long byte short, double float, **void**
2. AccessModifiers - **public private protected**
2. Modifiers - **static** abstract final synchronized transient native strictfp volatile
2. Unimplemented - goto const
2. --Control--
2. Guards - if else switch case default
2. Loops - do while for
2. Exits - **return** break continue throw assert
2. Destinations - try catch finally
2. Misc - **new this** super instanceof

vocab:

 object  variable function argument constructor primitive override object-hierarchy requirements conventions name namespace


We have showed that you get a default constructor ONLY if you don't write one and if you DO write one (or two or three) they must match the class name and NOT list a return type.

We looked at overrides and in particular recommended always overriding toString().

We talked about the two primary uses of 'this':
    1. in constructors where "this" is the name of the object being created and 
    2. in object functions where "this" is the name of the object on which the function was invoked.

We saw how to write a function like snogs() in one class and call it from another class.

One of the other things that we are doing here is that we are pretty much writing code the way that it actually gets written, meaning, that you write a few lines to do something, and then you immediately write a few lines to test the thing that you just wrote to see if things are working as expected. ALWAYS BE TESTING!

## Homework

Build an Animal class

Write an Animal class similar to what we did with Person. Animals will have three private String fields: name, type, and sound. You will want a constructor that uses 'this' and you will override toString. Basically the toString override should print something like:

  Fido the dog says, "Bark."
  Felix the cat says, "Meow."
  Smokey the bear says, "Only you can prevent forest fires."

If you can, try to write this referring only to your memory, but certainly refer to Person if you need to assistance. Also test that your Animal class works by creating an Animal over in the Hello class and printing it out.

## SPOILER
```java
  package hello;
   
  public class Animal {
    private String name;
    private String type;
    private String sound;
  
    public Animal(String name, String type, String sound){
      this.name = name; this.type = type; this.sound = sound;
    }
  
    @Override
    public String toString(){
      return name + " the " + type + " says, \"" + sound + ".\"";
    }
  }
  

[next: Interfaces](Java0301.md)